anarchism is often defined as a political philosophy which holds the state to be undesirable , unnecessary , or harmful . however , others argue that while antistatism is central , it is in adeuate to define anarchism . therefore , they argue instead that anarchism entails opposing authority or hierarchical organiation in the conduct of human relations , including , but not limited to , the state system . proponents of anarchism , nown as anarchists , advocate stateless societies based on non hierarchical free association s . as a subtle and antidogmatic philosophy , anarchism draws on many currents of thought and strategy . anarchism does not offer a fied body of doctrine from a single particular world view , instead fluing and flowing as a philosophy . there are many types and traditions of anarchism , not all of which are mutual ly eclusive . anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally , support ing any thing from etreme individual ism to comple te collectivism . strains of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism or similar dual classifications . anarchism is often considered a radical left wing ideology , and much of anarchist economic s and anarchist legal philosophy reflect antiauthoritarian interpretations of communism , collectivism , syndicalism , mutualism , or participatory economic s . anarchism as a mass social movement has regularly endured fluctuations in popular ity . the central tendency of anarchism as a social movement has been represented by anarcho communism and anarcho syndicalism , with individualist anarchism being primarily a literary phenomenon which nevertheless did have an impact on the bigger currents and individualist s have also participated in large anarchist organiation s . many anarchists oppose all forms of aggression , support ing selfdefense or non violence anarchopacifism , while others have supported the use of some coercive measures , including violent revolution and propaganda of the deed , on the path to an anarchist society . etym ology and terminology the term derives from the ancient gree , anarcho s , meaning without ruler s , from the prefi an , without arhos , leader , from arh , authority , sovereignty , realm , magistracy ismos , from the suffi , iein iing . anarchists was the term adopted by maimilien de robespierre to attac those on the left whom he had used for his own end s during the french revolution but was determined to get rid of , though among these anarchists there were few who ehibited the social revolt characteristic s of later anarchists . there would be many revolution aries of the early nineteenth century who contributed to the anarchist doctrine s of the net generation , such as william godwin and wilhelm weitl ing , but they did not use the word anarchist or anarchism in describ ing themselves or their beliefs . pierre oseph proudhon was the first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist , maing the formal birth of anarchism the mid nineteenth century . since the s from france , the term libertarian ism has often been used as a synonym for anarchism and was used almost eclusive ly in this sense until the s in the united states its use as a synonym is still common outside the united states . on the other hand , some use libertarian ism to refer to individualist ic freemaret philosophy only , referr ing to freemaret anarchism as libertarian anarchism . history origin s the earliest anarchist the mes can be found in the th century bc , among the wors of taoist philosopher laoi , and in later centuries by huangi and bao ing y an . huangi s philosophy has been described by various sources as anarchist . huangi wrote , a petty thief is put in ail . a great become s a ruler of a nation . diogenes of sinope and the cynic s , their contemporary eno of citium , the founder of stoicism , also introduced similar topics . esus is sometimes considered the first anarchist in the christian anarchist tradition . georges lechartier wrote that the true founder of anarchy was esus christ and ... the first anarchist society was that of the apostles . such a distinction reverberates subversive religious conceptions lie the aforementioned seem ing ly anarchist ic taoist teaching s and that of other antiauthoritarian religious traditions creating a comple relationship regard ing the uestion as to whether or not anarchism and religion are compatible . this is eemplified when the glorificati on of the state is viewed as a form of sinful idolatry . the french renaissance political philosopher tienne de la botie has been said to write an important anarchist precedent in his most famous wor the discourse on voluntary servitude . the radical protestant christian gerrard winstanley and his group the diggers are cited by various author s as propos ing anarchist social measures in the th century in england . the term anarchist first entered the english language in , during the english civil war , as a term of abuse , used by royalists against their roundhead opponent s . by the time of the french revolution some , such as the enrags , began to use the term positive ly , in opposition to acobin central is ation of power , seeing revolutionary government as oymor on ic . by the turn of the th century , the english word anarchism had lost its initial negative connotati on . modern anarchism sprang from the secular or religious thought of the enlightenment , particular ly eanacues rousseau s argument s for the moral central ity of freedom . there were a variety of anarchist currents during the french revolution , with some revolution aries using the term anarchist e in a positive light as early as september . the enrags opposed revolutionary government as a contradicti on in terms . denounc ing the acobin dictatorship , ean varlet wrote in that government and revolution are in compatible , un less the people wishes to set its constituted authorities in permanent insurrection against itself . during the french revolution , sylva in marchal , in his manifes to of the euals , demanded the communal eno yment of the fru its of the earth and loo ed for ward to the disappearance of the revolt ing distinction of rich and poor , of great and small , of masters and valets , of governor s and governed . from this climate william godwin developed what many consider the first epression of modern anarchist thought . godwin was , according to peter ropotin , the first to formulate the political and economic al conceptions of anarchism , even though he did not give that name to the ideas developed in his wor , while godwin attac hed his anarchist ideas to an early edmund bure . benamin tucer instead credit s osiah warren , an american who promoted stateless and voluntary communities where all good s and services were private , with being the first man to epound and formulate the doctrine now nown as anarchism . the first to describe himself as an anarchist was pierre oseph proudhon , a french philosopher and politician , which led some to call him the founder of modern anarchist theory . the anarcho communist oseph dacue was the first person to describe himself as libertarian . unlie proudhon , he argued that , it is not the product of his or her labor that the worer has a right to , but to the satisf action of his or her needs , what ever may be their nature . in in germany the posthegel ian philosopher ma stirner published the boo the ego and its own which will later be considered an influential early tet of individualist anarchism . anarchists active in the revolution in france , included anselme be llegarrigue , ernest coeurderoy , oseph dacue and pierre oseph proudhon . first international and the paris commune in europe , harsh reaction followed the revolution s of , during which ten countries had eperience d brief or long term social upheaval as groups carried out national ist uprising s . after most of these attempt s at systematic change ended in failure , conservative elements too advantage of the divided groups of socialist s , anarchists , liberal s , and national ists , to prevent further revolt . in the international woring men s association sometimes called the first international united diverse revolutionary currents including french followers of proudhon , blanu ists , philadelphes , english trade union ists , socialist s and social democrats . due to its lins to active worers movements , the international became a significant organiation . arl mar became a leading figure in the international and a member of its general council . proudhon s followers , the mutualist s , opposed mar s state social ism , advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings . in , following their unsuccessful participation in the league of peace and freedom lpf , russian revolutionary mihail baunin and his collectivist anarchist associate s oined the first international which had decided not to get involved with the lpf . they allied themselves with the federalist socialist sections of the international , who advocated the revolutionary overthrow of the state and the collectiviation of property . at first , the collectivist s wor ed with the marist s to push the first international in a more revolutionary socialist direction . subseuently , the international became polarised into two camps , with mar and baunin as their respect ive figure head s . baunin characterised mar s ideas as central ist and predict ed that , if a marist party came to power , its leaders would simply tae the place of the ruling class they had fought against . anarchist historian george woodcoc reports that the annual congress of the international had not taen place in owing to the outbrea of the paris commune , and in the general council called only a special conference in london . one delegate was able to attend from spain and none from italy , while a techn ical ec use that they had split away from the fdration romande was used to avoid invit ing baunin s swiss supporters . thus only a tiny minority of anarchists was present , and the general council s resolution s passed almost unanimously . most of them were clear ly directed against baunin and his followers . in , the conflict climaed with a final split between the two groups at the hague congress , where baunin and ames guillaume were epelled from the international and its headuarters were transferred to new yor . in response , the federalist sections formed their own international at the st . imier congress , adopting a revolutionary anarchist program . the paris commune was a government that brief ly ruled paris from march more formal ly , from march to may . the commune was the result of an uprising in paris after france was defeated in the francop russian war . anarchists participated active ly in the establ ishment of the paris commune . they included george woodcoc manifes ts that organied labor the antiauthoritarian sections of the first international were the precursors of the anarchosyndicalist s , seeing to replace the privilege and authority of the state with the free and spontaneous organiation of labor . in , the federation of organied trade s and labor unions fotlu of the united states and canada unanimously set may , as the date by which the eighthour wor day would become standard . in response , unions across the united states prepared a general strie in support of the event . on may , in chicago , a fight broe out when strie brea er s attempt ed to cross the picet line , and two worers died when police open ed fire upon the crowd . the net day , may , anarchists staged a rally at chicago s haymaret suare . a bomb was th r own by an unnown party near the conclusion of the rally , illing an officer . in the ensuing panic , police open ed fire on the crowd and each other . seven police officer s and at least four worers were illed . eight anarchists directly and in directly related to the organisers of the rally were arrested and charged with the murder of the deceased officer . the men became international political celebrities among the labour movement . four of the men were eecuted and a fifth committed suicide prior to his own eecution . the incident became nown as the haymaret affair , and was a set bac for the labour movement and the struggle for the eighthour day . in a second attempt , this time international in scope , to organise for the eighthour day was made . the event also had the secondary purpose of memorial iing worers illed as a result of the haymaret affair . although it had initially been conceived as a on ceoff event , by the following year the celebrati on of international worers day on may day had become firm ly established as an international worer s holiday . in , the international anarchist congress of amsterdam gather ed delegate s from different countries , among which important figure s of the anarchist movement , including errico malatesta , pierre monatte , luigi fabbri , be not broutchou , emma goldman , rudolf rocer , and christ iaan cornelissen . various the mes were treated during the congress , in particular concern ing the organisation of the anarchist movement , popular education issues , the general strie or antimilitarism . a central debate concerned the relation between anarchism and syndicalism or trade union ism . malatesta and monatte were in particular disagreement themselves on this issue , as the latter thought that syndicalism was revolutionary and would create the conditions of a social revolution , while malatesta did not consider syndicalism by itself sufficient . he thought that the trade union movement was reform ist and even conservative , citing as essentially bourgeois and anti worer the phenomenon of professional union official s . malatesta warned that the syndicalists aims were in perpetuat ing syndicalism itself , where as anarchists must always have anarchy as their end and conseuently refra in from committ ing to any particular method of achiev ing it . the spanish worers federation in was the first maor anarchosyndicalist movement anarchist trade union federation s were of special importance in spain . the most successful was the confederacin nacional del trabao national con federation of labour cnt , founded in . before the s , the cnt was the maor force in spanish woring class politics , attract ing . million members at one point and play ing a maor role in the spanish civil war . the cnt was affiliated with the international worers association , a federation of anarchosyndicalist trade unions founded in , with delegate s represent ing two million worers from countries in europe and latin america . in latin america in particular the anarchists uicly became active in organ iing craft and industrial worers throughout south and central america , and until the early s most of the trade unions in meico , b rail , peru , chile , and argentina were anarchosyndicalist in general out loo the prestige of the spanish c.n.t . as a revolutionary organiation was undoubted ly to a great etent responsible for this situation . the largest and most militant of these organiation s was the federac in obrera regional argentina ... it grew uicly to a members hip of nearly a uarter of a million , which dwarfed the rival social democratic unions . propaganda of the deed and illegalism some anarchists , such as ohann most , advocated publici ing violent acts of retaliati on against counter revolution aries because we p reach not only action in and for itself , but also action as propaganda . by the s , people in side and outside the anarchist movement began to use the s log an , propaganda of the deed to refer to individual bombings , regicide s , and tyrannicide s . from on ward s , the russian counter parts of these anti syndicalist anarchist communist s become partisans of economic terrorism and illegal epropriations . illegalism as a practice emerged and within it the acts of the anarchist bomb ers and assassin s propaganda by the deed and the anarchist burglars individual reappropriati on epressed their desper ation and their personal , violent reection of an intolerable society . more over , they were clear ly meant to be eemplary invit ations to revolt . . france s b on not gan g was the most famous group to embrace illegalism . however , as soon as , important figure s in the anarchist movement distanced themselves from such individual acts . peter ropotin thus wrote that year in le rvolt that a structure based on centuries of history can not be destroyed with a few ilos of dynamite . a variety of anarchists advocated the abandonment of these sorts of tactics in favor of collective revolutionary action , for eample through the trade union movement . the anarchosyndicalist , fer n and pelloutier , argued in for renewed anarchist involvement in the labor movement on the basis that anarchism could do very well without the individual dynamite r . state r epression including the in famous french lois sclrates of the anarchist and labor movement s following the few successful bombings and assassin ations may have contributed to the abandonment of these inds of tactics , although reciprocally state r epression , in the first place , may have played a role in these isolated acts . the dismemberment of the french socialist movement , into many groups and , following the suppression of the paris commune , the eecution and eile of many communards to penal colonies , favored individualist political epression and acts . numerous head s of state were assassin ated between and by members of the anarchist movement . for eample , u.s. president mcinley s assassin le on colgos claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist emma goldman . bombings were associated in the media with anarchists because international terrorism arose during this time period with the widespread distribution of dynamite . this image remains to this day . propaganda of the deed was abandoned by the vast maority of the anarchist movement after world war i and the october revolution . russian revolution and other uprising s of the s anarchists participated along side the bolshevi s in both february and october revolution s , and were initially enthusiastic about the bolshevi revolution . however , following a political fall ing out with the bolshevi s by the anarchists and other left wing opposition , the conflict culminated in the ronstadt rebellion , which the new government repress ed . anarchists in central russia were either imprisoned , driven underground or oined the victorious bolshevi s the anarchists from petrograd and moscow fled to the uraine . there , in the free territory , they fought in the civil war against the whites a group ing of monarch ists and other opponent s of the october revolution and then the bolshevi s as part of the revolutionary insurrectionary army of uraine led by nestor mahno , who established an anarchist society in the region for a number of months . epelled american anarchists emma goldman and aleander be rman were among st those agitat ing in response to bolshevi policy and the suppression of the ronstadt uprising , before they left russia . both wrote account s of their eperience s in russia , critici ing the amount of control the bolshevi s eercised . for them , baunin s predictions about the conseuences of marist rule that the ruler s of the new socialist marist state would become a new elite had proved all too true . the victory of the bolshevi s in the october revolution and the resulting russian civil war did serious damage to anarchist movements international ly . many worers and activists saw bolshevi success as setting an eample communist parties grew at the epense of anarchism and other socialist movements . in france and the united states , for eample , members of the maor syndicalist movements of the cgt and iww left the organiation s and oined the communist international . the revolutionary wave of saw the active participation of anarchists in varying degrees of protag on ism . in the german uprising nown as the german revolution of which established the bavar ian soviet republic the anarchists gustav landauer , silvio gesell and erich mhsam had important leadership position s within the revolutionary council ist structure s . in the italian events nown as the biennio rosso the anarchosyndicalist trade union union e sindacale italian a grew to , members and the influence of the italian anarchist union , members plus umanita nova , its daily paper grew according ly ... anarchists were the first to suggest occupy ing wor places . in the meican revolution the meican liberal party was established and during the early s it lead a series of military offensives leading to the conuest and occupation of certain town s and district s in baa california with the leadership of anarcho communist ricardo flores magn . in paris , the dielo truda group of russian anarchist eile s , which included nestor mahno , concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structure s of bolshevi s m . their manifes to , called the organiation al platform of the general union of anarchists draft , was supported . platform ist groups active today include the worers solidarity movement in irel and and the north eastern federation of anarchist communist s of north america . synthesis anarchism emerged as an organiation al alternative to platform ism that tries to oin anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adectives . in the s this form found as its main proponents vol in and sebastien faure . it is the main principle behind the anarchist federation s group ed around the contemporary global international of anarchist federation s . conflict s with european fascist regime s in the s and s , the rise of fasc ism in europe trans formed anarchism s conflict with the state . italy saw the first struggle s between anarchists and fascist s . italian anarchists played a ey role in the anti fascist organisation arditi del popolo , which was strong est in areas with anarchist traditions , and achieved some success in their activism , such as repell ing blacshirts in the anarchist stronghold of parma in august . the veteran italian anarchist , luigi fabbri , was one of the first critical the or ists of fasc ism , describ ing it as the prevent ive counter revolution . in france , where the far right league s came close to insurrection in the february riot s , anarchists divided over a united front policy . anarchists in france and italy were active in the resistance during world war ii . in germany the anarchist erich mhsam was arrested on charge s unnown in the early morning hours of february , within a few hours after the reichstag fire in be rl in . oseph goebbels , the nai propaganda minister , label led him as one of those ewish subversive s . over the net seven teen months , he would be imprisoned in the concentration camps at sonnenburg , brandenburg and finally , oranienburg . on february , mhsam was transferred to the concentration camp at oranienburg when finally on the night of uly , mhsam was to rtured and murder ed by the guards , his battered corpse found hanging in a latrine the net morning . spanish revolution in spain , the national anarchosyndicalist trade union confederacin nacional del trabao initially refused to oin a popular front electoral alliance , and abstenti on by cnt supporters led to a right wing election victory . but in , the cnt changed its policy and anarchist votes help ed bring the popular front bac to power . months later , the former ruling class respond ed with an attempt ed coup causing the spanish civil war . in response to the army rebellion , an anarchist inspired movement of peasants and worers , supported by armed militia s , too control of barcelona and of large areas of rural spain where they collectivised the land . but even before the fascist victory in , the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the stalin ists , who controlled the distribution of military aid to the republican cause from the soviet union . the events nown as the spanish revolution was a worers social revolution that began during the outbrea of the spanish civil war in and resulted in the widespread implementati on of anarchist and more broad ly libertarian socialist organiation al principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years , primarily catalonia , aragon , and alusia , and parts of the levante . much of spain s economy was put under worer control in anarchist stronghold s lie catalonia , the figure was as high as , but lower in areas with heavy communist party of spain influence , as the soviet allied party active ly resist ed attempt s at collectiviation enactment . factories were run through worer committee s , agrarian areas became collectivised and run as libertarian commune s . anarchist historian sam dolgoff estimated that about eight million people participated directly or at least in directly in the spanish revolution , which he claimed came close r to reali ing the ideal of the free stateless society on a vast scale than any other revolution in history . stalin ist led troops suppressed the collective s and persecuted both dissident marist s and anarchists . the prominent italian anarchist camillo be rneri , who vol unteered to fight against franco was illed instead in spain by gun men associated with the spanish communist party . postwar years anarchism sought to reorganie itself after the war . the meican anarchist federation was established in after the anarchist federation of the center united with the anarchist federation of the federal district . in the early s , the anti fascist international solidarity and the federation of anarchist groups of cuba merged into the large national organiation as ociac in libertaria de cuba cuba n libertarian association . from to , the bulgar ian anarchist communist federation re emerged as part of a factor y and wor place committee movement , but was repress ed by the new communist regime . in in france the fdration anarchist e was established and the also synthesis t federaione anarchica italian a was founded in italy . or ean anarchists formed the league of free social constructors in september and in the apanese anarchist federation was founded . an international anarchist congress with delegate s from across europe was held in paris in may . after world war ii , an appeal in the fraye arbeter sh time detail ing the p light of german anarchists and called for americans to support them . by february , the s end ing of aid parcels to anarchists in germany was a large scale operation . the federation of libertarian socialist s was founded in germany in and rudolf rocer wrote for its organ , die freie gesell schaft , which survived until . in the uruguayan anarchist federation was founded . in the anarcho communist federation of argentina renamed itself as the argentine libertarian federation . the organiation al debate between synthesis anarchism and platform ism too importance once again especially in the anarchist movements of italy and france . the syndicalist worers federation was a syndicalist group in active in postwar britain , and one of the solidarity federation s earliest predecessors . it was formed in by members of the dissolved anarchist federation of britain . unlie the afb , which was influenced by anarchosyndicalist ideas but ultimate ly not syndicalist itself , the swf decided to pursue a more definite ly syndicalist , worer centred strategy from the out set . anarchism continued to influence important literary and intellectual personal ities of the time , such as albert camus , her be rt read , paul goodman , dwight macdonald , all en ginsberg , george woodcoc , ul ian bec and the french surre alist group led by and r bret on , which now open ly embrace d anarchism and collaborated in the fdration anarchist e . anarchopacifism became influential in the anti nuclear movement and anti war movement s of the time as can be seen in the activism and writings of the english anarchist member of campaign for nuclear disarmament ale comfort or the similar activism of the american catholic anarcho pacif ists ammon hennacy and dorothy day . anarchopacifism became a basis for a critiue of milit ar ism on both sides of the cold war . the resurgence of anarchist ideas during this period is well document ed in robert graham s anarchism a document ary history of libertarian ideas , volume two the emergence of the new anarchism . contemporary anarchism a surge of popular interest in anarchism occurred in western nation s during the s and s . anarchism was influential in the counter culture of the s and anarchists active ly participated in the late sities student s and worers revolt s . in in carrara , italy the international of anarchist federation s was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in by the three eist ing european federation s of france the fdration anarchist e , the federaione anarchica italian a of italy and the iber ian anarchist federation as well as the bulgar ia n federation in french eile . in the united ing dom in the s this was associated with the pun roc movement , as eemplified by band s such as crass and the se pistols . the hous ing and employment crisis in most of western europe led to the form ation of commune s and suatter movements lie that of barcelona , spain . in den mar , suatter s occupied a dis used military base and declared the free town christian ia , an autonomous have n in central copenhagen . since the revival of anarchism in the mid th century , a number of new movements and schools of thought emerged . although feminist tendencies have always been a part of the anarchist movement in the form of anarchafeminism , they returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism in the s . the american civil rights movement and the movement against the war in vietnam also contributed to the revival of north american anarchism . european anarchism of the late th century drew much of its strength from the labour movement , and both have incorporated animal rights activism . anarchist anthropolog ist david graeber and anarchist historian and re grubacic have posited a rupture between generation s of anarchism , with those who often still have not shaen the sectarian hab its of the th century contrasted with the younger activists who are much more in formed , among other elements , by indigenous , feminist , ecological and cultural critical ideas , and who by the turn of the st century formed by far the maority of anarchists . around the turn of the st century , anarchism grew in popular ity and influence as part of the anti war , anti capitalist , and anti global is ation movement s . anarchists became nown for their involvement in protests against the meet ing s of the world trade organiation wto , group of eight , and the world economic for um . some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in riot ing , property destruction , and violent confrontations with police . these actions were precipitated by ad hoc , leader less , anonymous cadres nown as blac bloc s other organisation al tactics pioneered in this time include security culture , affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the inter net . a significant event of this period was the confrontations at wto conference in seattle in . according to anarchist scholar sim on critchley , contemporary anarchism can be seen as a powerful critiue of the pseudo libertarian ism of contemporary neo liberal ism ... one might say that contemporary anarchism is about responsibility , whether seual , ecological or socio economic it flows from an eperience of conscience about the manifold way s in which the west ravages the rest it is an ethical out rage at the yawn ing in euality , impoverishment and disenfranchisment that is so palp able locally and global ly . international anarchist federation s in eistence include the international of anarchist federation s , the international worers association , and international libertarian solidarity . the largest organise d anarchist movement today is in spain , in the form of the confederacin general del trabao cgt and the cnt . cgt members hip was estimated at around , for . other active syndicalist movements include in sweden the central organisation of the worers of sweden and the swedish anarchosyndicalist youth federation the cnt a it in france the union sindicale italian a in italy in the us worers solidarity alliance and the u solidarity federation . the revolutionary industrial union ist industrial worers of the world , claim ing , pay ing members , and the international worers association , an anarchosyndicalist success or to the first international , also remain active . anarchist schools of thought anarchist schools of thought had been generally group ed in two main historical traditions , individualist anarchism and social anarchism , which have some different origin s , values and evoluti on . the individualist wing of anarchism emphasise s negative liberty , i.e. opposition to state or social control over the individual , while those in the social wing emphasise positive liberty to achieve one s potential and argue that human s have needs that society ought to ful fill , recogni ing euality of entitlement . in a chronological and theoretical sense , there are classical those created throughout the th century and post classical anarchist schools those created since the mid th century and after . beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism , which embodies the theoretical stance that the state lacs moral legitimacy without accept ing the imperat ive of revolution to eliminate it . a component especially of individualist anarchism philosophical anarchism may accept the eistence of a minimal state as unfortunate , and usually temporary , necessary evil but argue that citiens do not have a moral oblig ation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonom y . one reaction against sectarian ism within the anarchist milieu was anarchism without adectives , a call for to ler ation first adopted by fer nando tarrida del mrmol in in response to the bitter debates of anarchist theory at the time . in ab and on ing the hyphenated anarchism s i.e. collectivist , communist , mutualist and individualist anarchism , it sought to emphasise the antiauthoritarian beliefs common to all anarchist schools of thought . classical anarchist schools of thought mutualism mutualism began in th century english and french labour movements before taing an anarchist form associated with pierre oseph proudhon in france and others in the united states . proudhon proposed spontaneous order , where by organiation emerges without central authority , a positive anarchy where order arises when every body does what he wishes and only what he wishes and where business trans actions alone produce the social order . it is important to recognie that proudhon distinguish ed between ideal political possibilities and practical governance . for this reason , much in contrast to some of his theoretical state ments concern ing ultimate spontaneous self governance , proudhon was heavily involved in french parliament ary politics and allied himself not with anarchist but socialist factions of worers movements and , in addition to advocating state protect ed charters for worer own ed cooperatives , promoted certain national iation sche mes during his life of public service . mutualist anarchism is concerned with reciprocity , free association , voluntary contract , federation , and credit and currency reform . according to the american mutualist william batchelder greene , each worer in the mutualist system would receive ust and eact pay for his wor services euivalent in cost being e change able for services euivalent in cost , without profit or discount . mutualism has been retrospect ive ly characterised as ideological ly situated between individualist and collectivist forms of anarchism . proudhon first characterised his goal as a third form of society , the synthesis of communism and property . individualist anarchism individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasie the individual and their will over any inds of eternal determinants such as groups , society , traditions , and ideological system s . individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualist ic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict . in , william godwin , who has often been cited as the first anarchist , wrote political ustice , which some consider the first epression of anarchism . godwin , a philosophical anarchist , from a r ation alist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present necessary evil that would become increasing ly irrelevant and power less by the gradu al spread of nowledge . godwin advocated individual ism , propos ing that all cooper ation in labour be eliminate d on the premise that this would be most conduc ive with the general good . an influential form of individualist anarchism , called egoism , or ego ist anarchism , was epound ed by one of the earliest and best nown proponents of individualist anarchism , the german ma stirner . stirner s the ego and its own , published in , is a founding tet of the philosophy . according to stirner , the only limit ation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire , without regard for god , state , or morality . to stirner , rights were spoos in the mind , and he held that society does not eist but the individuals are its real ity . stirner advocated self as serti on and for e saw unions of ego ists , non systematic association s continu ally renewed by all parties support through an act of will , which stirner proposed as a form of organiation in place of the state . ego ist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals . egoism has inspired many interpretations of stirner s philosophy . it was rediscovered and promoted by german philosophical anarchist and lgbt activ ist ohn henry macay . osiah warren is widely regarded as the first american anarchist , and the four page wee ly paper he edited during , the peace ful revolution ist , was the first anarchist period ical published . for american anarchist historian eunice minette schuster it is apparent ... that proudhon ian anarchism was to be found in the united states at least as early as and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the individualist anarchism of osiah warren and stephen pearl andrew s ... william b. greene present ed this proudhon ian mutualism in its purest and most systematic form . . henry david thoreau was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the united states and europe . thoreau was an american author , poet , natural ist , ta resister , development critic , survey or , historian , philosopher , and leading trans cendent alist . he is best nown for his boos walden , a reflect ion upon simple living in natural surroundings , and his essay , civil disobedience , an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an un ust state . later benamin tucer f used stirner s egoism with the economic s of warren and proudhon in his eclectic influential public ation liberty . from these early influence s individualist anarchism in different countries attract ed a small but diverse following of bohemian art ists and intellectual s , free love and birth control advocate s see anarchism and issues related to love and se , individualist natur ist s nud ist s see anarcho natur ism , freethought and anti clear ical activists as well as young anarchist outlaw s in what became nown as illegalism and individual reclam ation see european individualist anarchism and individualist anarchism in france . these author s and activists included oscar wilde , emile arm and , h an ryner , henri is ly , re no nova to re , miguel gimene igualada , adolf br and and lev chernyi among others . social anarchism social anarchism call s for a system with common ownership of means of production and democratic control of all organiation s , without any government authority or coercion . it is the largest school of thought in anarchism . social anarchism reects private property , seeing it as a source of social in euality while retaining respect for personal property , and emphasise s cooper ation and mutual aid . collectivist anarchism collectivist anarchism , also referred to as revolutionary social ism or a form of such , is a revolutionary form of anarchism , common ly associated with mihail baunin and ohann most . collectivist anarchists oppose all private ownership of the means of production , instead advocating that ownership be collectivised . this was to be achieved through violent revolution , first start ing with a small cohes ive group through acts of violence , or propaganda by the deed , which would in spire the worers as a who le to revolt and for cib ly collectivise the means of production . however , collectiviation was not to be etended to the distribution of income , as worers would be paid according to time wor ed , rather than receiv ing good s being distributed according to need as in anarcho communism . this position was critici s ed by anarchist communist s as effective ly up hold ing the wages system . collectivist anarchism arose contemporaneous ly with mar ism but opposed the marist dictatorship of the proletariat , despite the stated marist goal of a collectivist stateless society . anarchist , communist and collectivist ideas are not mutual ly eclusive although the collectivist anarchists advocated compens ation for labour , some held out the possibility of a post revolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need . anarcho communism anarchist communism also nown as anarcho communism , libertarian communism and occasionally as free communism is a theory of anarchism that advocate s abolition of the state , maret s , money , private property while retaining respect for personal property , and capitalism in favor of common ownership of the means of production , direct democracy and a horiontal networ of voluntary association s and worers council s with production and consumpti on based on the guiding principle from each according to his ability , to each according to his need . some forms of anarchist communism such as insurrectionary anarchism are strong ly influenced by egoism and radical individual ism , be lie v ing anarcho communism is the best social system for the reali ation of individual freedom . most anarcho communist s view anarcho communism as a way of reconcil ing the opposition between the individual and society . anarcho communism developed out of radical socialist currents after the french revolution but was first formulate d as such in the italian secti on of the first international . the theoretical wor of peter ropotin too importance later as it epanded and developed pro organiation alist and insurrectionary anti organiation alist sections . to date , the best nown eample s of an anarchist communist society i.e. , established around the ideas as they eist today and achiev ing world wide attention and nowledge in the historical can on , are the anarchist territories during the spanish revolution and the free territory during the russian revolution . through the efforts and influence of the spanish anarchists during the spanish revolution within the spanish civil war , start ing in anarchist communism eisted in most of aragon , parts of the levante and and alusia , as well as in the stronghold of anarchist catalonia before being crushed by the combined forces of the regime that won the war , hitler , mussolini , spanish communist party r epression bac ed by the ussr as well as economic and armaments blocade s from the capitalist countries and the spanish republic itself . during the russian revolution , anarchists such as nestor mahno wor ed to create and defend through the revolutionary insurrectionary army of uraine anarchist communism in the free territory of the uraine from before being conuered by the bolshevi s in . anarcho syndicalism anarcho syndicalism is a branch of anarchism that focuses on the labor movement . anarchosyndicalist s view labor unions as a potential force for revolution ary social change , replac ing capitalism and the state with a new society democratic ally self manag ed by worers . the basic principles of anarcho syndicalism are worers solidarity , direct action and worers self management anarchosyndicalist s believe that only direct action that is , action concentrated on directly attain ing a goal , as opposed to in direct action , such as elect ing a represent at ive to a government position will allow worers to liberate themselves . more over , anarchosyndicalist s believe that worers organiation s the organiation s that struggle against the wage system , which , in anarchosyndicalist theory , will eventual ly form the basis of a new society should be self manag ing . they should not have bosses or business agents rather , the worers should be able to mae all the decision s that affect them themselves . rudolf rocer was one of the most popular voices in the anarchosyndicalist movement . he out lined a view of the origin s of the movement , what it sought , and why it was important to the future of labor in his pamphlet anarcho syndicalism . the international worers association is an international anarchosyndicalist federation of various labor unions from different countries . the spanish confederacin nacional del trabao played and still play s a maor role in the spanish labor movement . it was also an important force in the spanish civil war . post classical schools of thought anarchism continues to generate many philosophies and movements , at times eclectic , drawing upon various sources , and syncretic , combin ing disparate concept s to create new philosophical approaches . anarchafeminism developed as a synthesis of radical feminism and anarchism that view s patriarchy male domin ation over women as a fundamental manifestation of compulsory government . it was inspired by the late th century writings of early feminist anarchists such as lucy parsons , emma goldman , and vol tairine de cleyre . anarchafemin ists , lie other radical feminist s , critici e and advocate the abolition of tradition al conceptions of family , education , and gender role s . gree n anarchism or e co anarchism is a school of thought within anarchism that emphasie s environmental issues , with an important precedent in anarcho natur ism , and whose main contemporary currents are anarcho primitivism and social ecology . anarchopacifism is a tendency that reects violence in the struggle for social change see non violence . it developed mostly in the netherlands , britain , and the united states , before and during the second world war . christian anarchism is a movement in political the ology that combin es anarchism and christian ity . its main proponents included leo tolstoy , dorothy day , ammon hennacy , and acues ellul . platform ism is a tendency within the wide r anarchist movement based on the organisation al theories in the tradition of dielo truda s organiation al platform of the general union of anarchists draft . the document was based on the eperience s of russian anarchists in the october revolution , which led eventual ly to the victory of the bolshevi s over the anarchists and other groups . the platform attempt ed to address and eplain the anarchist movement s failure s during the russian revolution . synthesis anarchism is a form of anarchist organiation that tries to oin anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adectives . in the s , this form found as its main proponents the anarcho communist s vol in e and sbastien faure . it is the main principle behind the anarchist federation s group ed around the contemporary global international of anarchist federation s . postleft anarchy is a recent current in anarchist thought that promotes a critiue of anarchism s relationship to tradition al left wing politics . some postleft ists see to escape the confines of ideology in general also present ing a critiue of organiation s and morality . influenced by the wor of ma stirner and by the marist situation ist international , postleft anarchy is mar ed by a focus on social insurrection and a reection of left ist social organisation . insurrectionary anarchism is a revolutionary theory , practice , and tendency within the anarchist movement which emphasie s insurrection within anarchist practice . it is critical of formal organiation s such as labor unions and federation s that are based on a political program me and period ic congress es . instead , insurrectionary anarchists advocate in formal organiation and small affinity group based organiation . insurrectionary anarchists put value in attac , permanent class conflict , and a refusal to negotiate or compromise with class enemies . post anarchism is a theoretical move toward s a synthesis of classical anarchist theory and post structur alist thought , drawing from diverse ideas including postmodernism , autonom ist mar ism , postleft anarchy , situation ism , and post colonial ism . anarcho capitalism advocate s the elimi nation of the state in favor of individual sovereignty in a free maret . anarcho capitalism developed from radical anti state libertarian ism and individualist anarchism , drawing from austr ian school economic s , study of law and economic s , and public choice theory . there is a strong current within anarchism which does not consider that anarcho capitalism can be considered a part of the anarchist movement due to the fact that anarchism has historical ly been an anti capitalist movement and for definitional reason s which see anarchism in compatible with capitalist forms . internal issues and debates anarchism is a philosophy that embodies many diverse attitudes , tendencies and schools of thought as such , disagreement over uestion s of values , ideology and tactics is common . the compatibil ity of capitalism , national ism , and religion with anarchism is widely disputed . similar ly , anarchism enoys comple relationship s with ideologies such as mar ism , communism and capitalism . anarchists may be motivated by human ism , divine authority , enlightened self interest , ve gan ism or any number of alternative ethical doctrine s . phenomena such as civil iation , technology e.g. within anarcho primitivism and insurrectionary anarchism , and the democratic process may be sharp ly critici ed within some anarchist tendencies and simultaneously lauded in others . on a tactical level , while propaganda of the deed was a tactic used by anarchists in the th century e.g. the nihil ist movement , some contemporary anarchists espo use alternative direct action method s such as non violence , counter economic s and anti state cryptography to bring about an anarchist society . about the scope of an anarchist society , some anarchists advocate a global one , while others do so by local one s . the divers ity in anarchism has led to widely different use of identical terms among different anarchist traditions , which has led to many definitional concern s in anarchist theory . topics of interest in tersect ing and over lapping between various schools of thought , certain topics of interest and internal disputes have proven perennial within anarchist theory . free love an important current within anarchism is free love . free love advocate s sometimes traced their roots bac to osiah warren and to eperimental communities , viewed seual freedom as a clear , direct epression of an individual s self ownership . free love particular ly stress ed women s rights since most seual laws discriminated against women for eample , marriage laws and anti birth control measures . the most important american free love ournal was lucifer the lightbearer edited by moses har man and lois waisbrooer , but also there eisted era heywood and angela heywood s the word , . free society as the fire br and as free society was a maor anarchist newspaper in the united states at the end of the th and beginning of the th centuries . the public ation advocated free love and women s rights , and critiue d comstocery censorship of seual information . also m . e . laarus was an important american individualist anarchist who promoted free love . in new yor city s gree nwich village , bohemian feminist s and socialist s advocated self reali s ation and pleasure for women and also men in the here and now . they encouraged play ing with seual role s and s euality , and the open ly bi seual radical edna st . vincent millay and the lesbian anarchist mar garet anderson were prominent among them . discussion groups organise d by the village rs were freuented by emma goldman , among others . magn us hirschfeld noted in that goldman has campaign ed bold ly and steadfast ly for individual rights , and especially for those deprived of their rights . thus it came about that she was the first and only woman , in deed the first and only american , to tae up the defense of homoseual love before the general public . in fact , before goldman , heteroseual anarchist robert reitel spoe positive ly of homoseuality from the beginning of the s in his detroit based german language ournal der arm e teufel . in argentina anarchafemin ist virginia bolten published the newspaper called , which was published nine times in rosario between anuary and anuary , and was revived , brief ly , in . in europe the main propag and ist of free love within individualist anarchism was emile arm and . he proposed the concept of la camaraderie amoure use to spea of free love as the possibility of voluntary seual en counter between consent ing adults . he was also a consistent proponent of polyamory . in germany the stirner ists adolf br and and ohn henry macay were pioneer ing campaign ers for the accept ance of male bi s euality and homoseuality . mueres libres was an anarchist women s organiation in spain that aimed to em power woring class women . it was founded in by luca snche saornil , mercedes comaposada and amparo poch y gascn and had approimate ly , members . the organiation was based on the idea of a double struggle for women s liberation and social revolution and argued that the two obectives were eually important and should be pursue d in parallel . in order to gain mutual support , they created networ s of women anarchists . luca snche saornil was a main founder of the spanish anarchafemin ist federation mueres libres who was open about her lesbian ism . . she was published in a variety of literary ournal s where woring under a male pen name , she was able to eplore lesbian the mes at a time when homoseuality was criminalied and subect to censorship and pun ishment . more recent ly , the british anarcho pacif ist ale comfort gained not oriety during the seual revolution for writing the best seller se manual the oy of se . the issue of free love has a dedicated treatment in the wor of french anarcho hed on ist philosopher michel onfray in such wors as thorie du corps amoure u pour une rotiue solaire and linvention du plaisir fragment s cyraniues . libertarian education and freethought for english anarchist william godwin education was the main means by which change would be achieved . godwin saw that the main goal of education should be the pro motion of happiness . for godwin education had to have a respect for the child s autonom y which precluded any form of coercion , a pedagogy that respect ed this and sought to build on the child s own motiv ation and in itiatives , and a concern about the child s capacity to resist an ideology trans mitted through the school . in his political ustice he critici es state sponsored school ing on account of its obvious alliance with national government . early american anarchist osiah warren advanced alternative education eperience s in the libertarian communities he established . ma stirner wrote in a long essay on education called the false principle of our education . in it stirner names his educational principle personal ist , eplain ing that self understanding consists in h our ly self cre ation . education for him is to create free men , sovereign characters , by which he means eternal characters ... who are therefore eternal because they form themselves each moment . in the united states freethought was a basic ally anti christian , anticlerical movement , whose purpose was to mae the individual political ly and spiritual ly free to decide for himself on religious matter s . a number of contributors to liberty anarchist public ation were prominent figure s in both freethought and anarchism . the individualist anarchist george macdonald was a coeditor of freethought and , for a time , the truth seeer . e.c . waler was coeditor of the ecellent freethought free love ournal lucifer , the lightbearer . many of the anarchists were ardent free thiner s reprints from freethought paper s such as lucifer , the lightbearer , freethought and the truth seeer appeared in liberty ... the church was viewed as a common ally of the state and as a repress ive force in and of itself . in , catalan anarchist and free thiner france sc ferrer i gurdia established modern or progress ive schools in barcelona in defiance of an educational system controlled by the catholic church . the schools stated goal was to educate the woring class in a r ation al , secular and non coercive setting . fierce ly anticlerical , ferrer believed in freedom in education , education free from the authority of church and state . murray boo ch in wrote this period s was the he y day of libertarian schools and pedagogical proect s in all areas of the country where anarchists eercised some degree of influence . perhaps the best nown effort in this field was francisco ferrer s modern school escuela modern a , a proect which eercised a consider able influence on catalan education and on eperimental techn iues of teaching generally . la escuela modern a , and ferrer s ideas generally , formed the in spir ation for a series of modern schools in the united states , cuba , south america and london . the first of these was start ed in new yor city in . it also inspired the italian newspaper universit popol are , founded in . russian christian anarchist leo tolstoy established a school for peasant children on his e state . tolstoy s educational eperiments were shortlived due to harassment by the tsar ist secret police . tolstoy established a concept ual differ ence between education and culture . he thought that education is the tendency of one man to mae another ust lie himself ... education is culture under restraint , culture is free . education is when the teaching is forced upon the pupil , and when then in struction is eclusive , that is when only those subect s are taught which the educator regard s as necessary . for him without compulsion , education was trans formed into culture . a more recent libertarian tradition on education is that of un school ing and the free school in which child led activity replace s pedagogic approaches . eperiments in germany led to a . s . ne ill founding what became summerhill school in . summerhill is often cited as an eample of anarchism in practice . however , although summerhill and other free schools are radical ly libertarian , they differ in principle from those of ferrer by not advocating an over t ly political class struggle approach . in addition to organ iing schools according to libertarian principles , anarchists have also uestion ed the concept of school ing per se . the term de school ing was popular ied by ivan ill ich , who argued that the school as an institution is dysfunction al for self determined learning and serves the cre ation of a consumer society instead . criticisms criticisms of anarchism include moral criticisms and pragmatic criticisms . see also references further read ing film eternal lins autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli , smile and loo at others less often , and respond less to their own name . autistic toddlers differ more striing ly from social norms for eample , they have less eye contact and turn taing , and do not have the ability to use simple movements to epress themselves , such as the deficiency to point at things . three to five yearold autistic children are less liely to ehibit social understanding , approach others spontaneous ly , imitate and respond to emotion s , communicate nonverbal ly , and tae turn s with others . however , they do form attachment s to their primary caregivers . most autistic children dis play moderately less attachment security than non autistic children , although this differ ence disappears in children with higher mental development or less severe asd . older children and adults with asd perform worse on tests of face and emotion re cognition . children with high functioning autism suffer from more intense and freuent loneliness compared to non autistic peers , despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone . maing and maintain ing friendships often proves to be difficult for those with autism . for them , the uality of friendships , not the number of friends , predicts how l one ly they feel . functional friendships , such as those resulting in invit ations to parties , may affect the uality of life more deeply . there are many anecdotal reports , but few systematic studies , of aggression and violence in individuals with asd . the limited data suggest that , in children with mental retardation , autism is associated with aggression , destruction of property , and tantrum s . a study inter viewed parents of children with asd and reported that about twothirds of the children had period s of severe tantrum s and about onethird had a history of aggression , with tantrum s significant ly more common than in non autistic children with language impairment s . a swedish study found that , of individuals aged or older dis charged from hospital with a diagnosis of asd , those who committed violent cri mes were significant ly more liely to have other psychopathological conditions such as psychosis . communication about a third to a half of individuals with autism do not develop enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs . differences in communication may be present from the first year of life , and may include delay ed onset of babbling , unusual gestures , diminished responsiveness , and vocal pattern s that are not synchronied with the caregiver . in the second and third years , autistic children have less freuent and less diverse babbling , consonants , words , and word combin ations their gestures are less often in tegrated with words . autistic children are less liely to mae reuests or share eperience s , and are more liely to simply repeat others words echolalia or reverse pronouns . oint attention seems to be necessary for functional speech , and deficits in oint attention seem to distinguish infants with asd for eample , they may loo at a point ing hand instead of the point ed at obect , and they consistently fail to point at obects in order to comment on or share an eperience . autistic children may have difficult y with imaginative play and with develop ing symbols into language . in a pair of studies , high functioning autistic children aged perform ed eually well as , and adults better than , individual ly match ed control s at basic language tass involving vocabul ary and spelling . both autistic groups perform ed worse than control s at comple language tass such as figurat ive language , comprehension and in fer ence . as people are often s ied up initially from their basic language sills , these studies suggest that people speaing to autistic individuals are more liely to over estimate what their audience comprehends . repetitive behavior autistic individuals dis play many forms of repetitive or restricted behavior , which the repetitive behavior scale revised rbsr categories as follow s . no single repetitive or self in urious behavior seems to be specific to autism , but only autism appears to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors . other symptoms autistic individuals may have symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis , but that can affect the individual or the family . an estimated . to of individuals with asd show unusual abilities , ranging from splinter sills such as the memori ation of trivia to the etraordinari ly rare talents of prodigious autistic savants . many individuals with asd show superior sills in perception and attention , relative to the general population . sensory abnormalities are found in over of those with autism , and are considered core feature s by some , although there is no good evidence that sensory symptoms different iate autism from other developmental disorders . differences are greater for under responsivity for eample , waling into things than for over responsivity for eample , dis tress from loud noises or for sens ation seeing for eample , rhythmic movements . an estimated of autistic people have motor signs that include poor muscle to ne , poor motor planning , and to e waling deficits in motor coordi nation are pervasive across asd and are greater in autism proper . unusual eating behavior occur s in about three uarter s of children with asd , to the etent that it was former ly a diagnostic in dicator . selectiv ity is the most common problem , although eating rituals and food refusal also occur this does not appear to result in malnutrition . although some children with autism also have gastrointestinal gi symptoms , there is a lac of published rigorous data to support the theory that autistic children have more or different gi symptoms than usual studies report conflict ing results , and the relationship between gi problems and asd is unclear . parents of children with asd have higher level s of stress . siblings of children with asd report greater admir ation of and less conflict with the affected sibling than siblings of un affected children and were similar to siblings of children with down syndrome in these aspects of the sibling relationship . however , they reported lower level s of close ness and in timacy than siblings of children with down syndrome siblings of individuals with asd have greater ris of negative well being and poor er sibling relationship s as adults . classific ation autism is one of the five pervasive developmental disorder s pdd , which are characterie d by widespread abnormalities of social interactions and communication , and severe ly restricted interests and highly repetitive behavior . these symptoms do not imp ly sicness , fragil ity , or emotional disturbance . of the five pdd forms , asperger syndrome is close st to autism in signs and liely causes rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder share several signs with autism , but may have un related causes pdd not other wise specified pddnos also called a typical autism is diagnosed when the criteria are not met for a more specific disorder . unlie with autism , people with asperger syndrome have no substantial delay in language development . the terminology of autism can be be wild er ing , with autism , asperger syndrome and pddnos often called the autism spectrum disorders asd or sometimes the autistic disorders , where as autism itself is often called autistic disorder , childhood autism , or infantile autism . in this article , autism refers to the classic autistic disorder in clinical practice , though , autism , asd , and pdd are often used inter change ably . asd , in turn , is a subset of the broad er autism phenotype , which describe s individuals who may not have asd but do have autistic lie traits , such as avoid ing eye contact . the manifestation s of autism cover a wide spectrum , ranging from individuals with severe impairment s who may be silent , mental ly dis able d , and loced into hand f lapping and roc ing to high functioning individuals who may have active but distinct ly odd social approaches , narrow ly focused interests , and verbose , pedantic communication . because the behavior spectrum is continuous , boundaries between diagnostic categories are necessarily some what arbitr ary . sometimes the syndrome is divided into low , medium or high functioning autism lfa , mfa , and hfa , based on i threshold s , or on how much support the individual reuire s in daily life these subdivisions are not standard ied and are controversial . autism can also be divided into syndromal and non syndromal autism the syndromal autism is associated with severe or profound mental retardation or a congenital syndrome with physical symptoms , such as tuberous sclerosis . although individuals with asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitive ly than those with autism , the etent of the overlap between asperger syndrome , hfa , and non syndromal autism is unclear . some studies have reported diagnose s of autism in children due to a loss of language or social sills , as opposed to a failure to mae progress , typical ly from to months of age . the validity of this distinction remains controversial it is possible that regress ive autism is a specific subtype , or that there is a continuum of behaviors between autism with and without regress ion . research into causes has been hampered by the in ability to identify biologically meaning ful sub groups within the autistic population and by the tradition al boundaries between the dis ciplines of psych iatry , psych ology , neur ology and pediatrics . new er technologies such as fmri and diffusion tensor imaging can help identify biologically relevant phenotype s observ able traits that can be viewed on brain s can s , to help further neuro genetic studies of autism one eample is lower ed activity in the fusi form face area of the brain , which is associated with impaired perception of people versus obects . it has been proposed to class ify autism using genetic s as well as behavior . causes it has long been presumed that there is a common cause at the genetic , cognitive , and neur al level s for autism s characteristic triad of symptoms . however , there is increasing suspicion that autism is instead a comple disorder whose core aspects have distinct causes that often co occur . autism has a strong genetic basis , although the genetic s of autism are comple and it is unclear whether asd is eplain ed more by rare mutation s with maor effects , or by rare multigene interactions of common genetic variants . comple ity arises due to interactions among multiple gene s , the environ ment , and epi genetic factors which do not change dna but are herit able and influence gene epression . studies of twins suggest that herit ability is . for autism and as high as . for asd , and siblings of those with autism are about times more liely to be autistic than the general population . however , most of the mutation s that increase autism ris have not been identified . typical ly , autism can not be traced to a men del ian single gene mutation or to a single chromosome abnormal ity , and none of the genetic syndrome s associated with asd s have been shown to selectiv ely cause asd . numerous candidate gene s have been located , with only small effects attribut able to any particular gene . the large number of autistic individuals with un affected family members may result from copy number variation s spontaneous deletions or duplications in genetic material during meiosis . hence , a substantial fr action of autism cases may be trace able to genetic causes that are highly herit able but not in herit ed that is , the mutation that causes the autism is not present in the parent al genome . several lines of evidence point to synaptic dysfunction as a cause of autism . some rare mutation s may lead to autism by disrupt ing some synaptic pathways , such as those involved with cell adhesion . gene replace ment studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activity dependent changes . all nown teratogen s agents that cause birth defect s related to the ris of autism appear to act during the first eight wees from conception , and though this does not eclude the possibility that autism can be in itiated or affected later , it is strong evidence that autism arises very early in development . although evidence for other environmental causes is anecdotal and has not been confirmed by reliable studies , etensive searches are under way . environmental factor s that have been claimed to contribute to or eacerbate autism , or may be important in future research , include certain food s , in fectious disease , heavy metals , solvent s , diesel ehaust , pcbs , phthalates and phenol s used in plastic product s , pesticide s , brominated flame retard ant s , alcohol , smo ing , ill ic it drug s , vaccine s , and prenatal stress , although no lins have been found , and some have been completely dis proven . parents may first become aware of autistic symptoms in their child around the time of a routine vacci nation . this has led to un supported theories blam ing vaccine over load , a vaccine preservat ive , or the mmr vaccine for causing autism . the latter theory was supported by a litigationfunded study that has since been shown to have been an elaborate fraud . although these theories lac convinc ing scientific evidence and are biologically implausible , parent al concern about a potential vaccine l in with autism has led to lower rates of childhood immuni ations , outbrea s of previous ly controlled childhood disease s in some countries , and the prevent able deaths of several children . mechanism autism s symptoms result from matur ation related changes in various system s of the brain . how autism occur s is not well understood . its mechanism can be divided into two areas the pathophysi ology of brain structure s and processes associated with autism , and the neuropsychological linages between brain structure s and behaviors . the behaviors appear to have multiple pathophysi ologies . pathophysi ology unlie many other brain disorders , such as parinson s , autism does not have a clear unify ing mechanism at either the molecular , cellular , or system s level it is not nown whether autism is a few disorders caused by mutation s converg ing on a few common molecular pathways , or is lie intellectual dis ability a large set of disorders with diverse mechanism s . autism appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain system s , and to dis turb the tim ing of brain development more than the final product . neur oanatomical studies and the association s with teratogen s strong ly suggest that autism s mechanism include s alter ation of brain development soon after conception . this anoma ly appears to start a cascade of pathological events in the brain that are significant ly influenced by environmental factors . ust after birth , the brain s of autistic children tend to grow faster than usual , followed by normal or relative ly s lower growth in childhood . it is not nown whether early over growth occur s in all autistic children . it seems to be most prominent in brain areas underlying the development of higher cognitive special iation . hypotheses for the cellular and molecular base s of pathological early over growth include the following interactions between the immune system and the nervous system begin early during the embryonic stage of life , and successful neuro development depend s on a balance d immune response . aberrant immune activity during critical period s of neuro development is possibly part of the mechanism of some forms of asd . although some abnormalities in the immune system have been found in specific sub groups of autistic individuals , it is not nown whether these abnormalities are relevant to or secondary to autism s disease processes . as autoantibodies are found in conditions other than asd , and are not always present in asd , the relationship between immune disturbance s and autism remains unclear and controversial . neurochemical system s the relationship of neurochemical s to autism is not well understood several have been investig ated , with the most evidence for the role of seroton in and of genetic differences in its transport . the role of group i metabotropic glutamate receptors mglur in the path ogenesis of fragil e syndrome , the most common identified genetic cause of autism , has led to interest in the possible implic ations for future autism research into this path way . some data suggest an increase in several growth horm one s other data argue for diminished growth factor s . also , some in born errors of metabol ism are associated with autism , but probably account for less than of cases . brain system s mirror neur on system the mirror neur on system mns theory of autism hypothesies that dis to rt ion in the development of the mns interfere s with imitation and lead s to autism s core feature s of social impairment and communication difficulties . the mns operates when an animal perform s an action or observ es another animal perform the same action . the mns may contribute to an individual s understanding of other people by enabl ing the model ing of their behavior via embodied sim ul ation of their actions , intentions , and emotion s . several studies have test ed this hypothesis by demonstrat ing structur al abnormalities in mns regions of individuals with asd , delay in the activ ation in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with asperger syndrome , and a correl ation between reduced mns activity and severity of the syndrome in children with asd . however , individuals with autism also have abnormal brain activ ation in many circuit s outside the mns and the mns theory does not eplain the normal performance of autistic children on imitation tass that involve a goal or obect . asd related pattern s of low function and aberrant activ ation in the brain differ depend ing on whether the brain is do ing social or nonsocial tass . default networ and ta s positive networ asd related pattern s of low function and aberrant activ ation in the brain differ depend ing on whether the brain is do ing social or nonsocial tass . a brain imaging study found a specific pattern of signal s in the cingulate corte which differ s in individuals with asd . a review states that evidence suggest s that an entire networ of brain regions involved in social and emotional processing , the default networ or default mode networ dmn , show s reduced functional connectivity . this indicate s that the brain regions do not communicate in the same way that they would in a typical brain . two main hubs of the dmn , the post erior cingulate corte and media l prefrontal corte , appear to be hypo active relative to neuro typical adults , which may disrupt the functioning of the entire networ . dysfunction in dmn connectivity is prominent in adolesc ents and young adults with autism , suggest ing that manifestation of dmn dysfunction may occur early in development . in contrast to the dysfunction in the dmn networ , intact connectivity has been observ ed in a central eecutive networ that is involved in sustained attention , cognitive control , and goal directed thining . in people with autism , this networ often called the ta s positive networ and the dmn are not negative ly correl ated in time as found in typical adults , suggest ing a possible im balance in switch ing between the two networ s , and possibly reflect ing a disturbance of self refer ential thought . salience networ the salience networ sn is anchored in the anterior cingulate and the anterior insula . this networ is thought to be involved in detecting , integrating , and filter ing relevant inter ocept ive , autonom ic , and emotional information to guide attention and action . the sn also include s two important sub cortical structure s the amygdala and the substantia nigra ventral teg mental area . these structure s are thought to play a maor role in detecting emotional and re ward salience . both functional mri studies of social processing and mri studies that measure the sie of brain regions have shown dysfunction of the sn in individuals with autism . one of the regions consistently show ing significant hypo activity in autism is the right anterior insula . dysfunction in this networ may result in problems using internal body sens ations to guide attention to salient social and other events , with significant conseuences for both cognition and self monitor ing . recent studies demonstrat e that in the typical brain the anterior insula provide s an alter ing signal to in it iate appropriate response s to salient stimuli . because the anterior insula is under active during social processing in individuals with autism , in effective salience mapp ing of social ly relevant cues may result in a typical social interactions . in contrast , hyper activity of the anterior insula has been consistently implic ated in aniety disorders . the anterior insula is proposed to play a ey role in eperienc ing negative and wor ri some thought s , as well as coordi nat ing avoid ance behaviors in individuals prone to aniety . these are not eworthy findings because aniety disorders are a common comorbid feature of many disorders , including autism . therefore , hyper activity of the anterior insula or other nodes of the sn may lead to pathological ly enhanced salience detection in some situation s but not others . these findings may give eplan ation to many of the phenotypic or behavior al present ations of the disorder . for in stance , symptoms lie stimulatory behavior , increased aniety , or neuro ticism may be conseu ence of the anterior insula mis attribut ing emotional salience to mundane events . triple networ model because the default mode networ , the salience networ , and the central eecutive networ s appear to under lie prominent feature s of many maor psychiatric and neurological disorders including autism , schiophrenia , adhd , ad , ftd , depression and epilepsy , a common framewor was recent ly proposed for understanding dysfunction across disorders the triple networ model . this model propos es that deficits in engaging and dis engaging these networ s play a significant role in many disorders , including autism . by study ing networ s instead of specific brain regions , it may be possible to gain new insights into understanding dysfunction across a number of disorders . a significant number of disorders have symptoms that overlap with autism spectrum disorders , and autism spectrum diagnose s tend to be comorbid with other disorders . many individuals with autism may also be diagnosed with or show symptoms of depression , aniety , and obsessivecompuls ive tendencies , among others . the triple networ model framewor may help eplain why these comorbid ities occur , and allow customied interventions . designing individual ied interventions is important because autism manifes ts different ly across individuals , often varying from individual to individual . research ers focus ing on the eti ology of autism are beginning to recognie that symptoms can not be as cribed to the isolated operations of single brain areas . the triple networ model reflect s a shift from study ing specific brain region to study ing coordinated brain networ s . while it may remain unclear what initially causes the disturbance s in brain function that characterie autism , understanding how they manifes t in large scale networ function may provide insights into predicting dysfunction al behavior pattern s and designing appropriate interventions , for autism as well as for a wide range of other psych opath ologies . under connectivity theory the under connectivity theory of autism hypothesies that autism is mar ed by under functioning high level neur al connections and synchroni ation , along with an ecess of low level processes . evidence for this theory has been found in functional neuro imaging studies on autistic individuals and by a brain wave study that suggested that adults with asd have local over connectivity in the corte and wea functional connections between the front al lo be and the rest of the corte . other evidence suggest s the under connectivity is main ly within each hemisphere of the corte and that autism is a disorder of the association corte . stimulus processing in autism from studies based on event related potential s , trans ient changes to the brain s elect rical activity in response to stimuli , there is consider able evidence for differences in autistic individuals with respect to attention , or ient ation to auditory and visual stimuli , novelty detection , language and face processing , and information s to rage several studies have found a prefer ence for nonsocial stimuli . for eample , magn etoencephalography studies have found evidence in autistic children of delay ed response s in the brain s processing of auditory signal s . autism and schiophrenia in the genetic area , relations have been found between autism and schiophrenia based on duplications and deletions of chromosome s research showed that schiophrenia and autism are significant ly more common in combin ation with . del eti on syndrome . research on autism schiophrenia relations for chromosome . , chromosome p . and chromosome p are in conclus ive . neuro psych ology two maor categories of cognitive theories have been proposed about the lins between autistic brain s and behavior . the first category focuses on deficits in social cognition . the empathiing system iing theory post ulates that autistic individuals can system ie that is , they can develop internal rule s of operation to hand le events in side the brain but are less effective at empathiing by handling events generate d by other agents . an etension , the etreme male brain theory , hypothesies that autism is an etreme case of the male brain , defined psych omet rical ly as individuals in whom system iing is better than empathiing this etension is controversial , as many studies contradict the idea that ba by boys and girls respond different ly to people and obects . these theories are some what related to the earlier theory of mind approach , which hypothesies that autistic behavior arises from an in ability to as cri be mental states to one self and others . the theory of mind hypothesis is supported by autistic children s a typical response s to the s ally an ne test for reason ing about others motiv ations , and the mirror neur on system theory of autism described in pathophysi ology maps well to the hypothesis . however , most studies have found no evidence of impairment in autistic individuals ability to under st and other people s basic intentions or goal s instead , data suggest s that impairment s are found in understanding more comple social emotion s or in consider ing others view point s . the second category focuses on nonsocial or general processing the eecutive function s such as woring memory , planning , in hibit ion . in his review , enworthy states that the claim of eecutive dysfunction as a causal factor in autism is controversial , however , it is clear that eecutive dysfunction play s a role in the social and cognitive deficits observ ed in individuals with autism . tests of core eecutive processes such as eye movement tass indicate improve ment from late childhood to adolesc ence , but performance never reaches typical adult level s . a strength of the theory is predicting stereotyped behavior and narrow interests two weanesses are that eecutive function is hard to measure and that eecutive function deficits have not been found in young autistic children . wea central co her ence theory hypothesies that a limited ability to see the big picture under lie s the central disturbance in autism . one strength of this theory is predicting special talents and pe as in performance in autistic people . a related theory enhanced perceptual functioning focuses more on the superior ity of locally or ient ed and perceptual operations in autistic individuals . these theories ma p well from the under connectivity theory of autism . neither category is satis factor y on its own social cognition theories poor ly address autism s rigid and repetitive behaviors , while the nonsocial theories have difficult y eplain ing social impairment and communication difficulties . a combined theory based on multiple deficits may prove to be more useful . screening about half of parents of children with asd notice their child s unusual behaviors by age months , and about four fifth s notice by age months . according to an article in the ournal of autism and developmental disorders , failure to meet any of the following milestones is an absolute indic ation to proceed with further evaluations . delay in referr al for such test ing may delay early diagnosis and treatment and affect the long term out come . us and apanese practice is to screen all children for asd at and months , using autism specific formal screening tests . in contrast , in the u , children whose families or doctors recognie possible signs of autism are screen ed . it is not nown which approach is more effective . screening tools include the modified checl ist for autism in toddlers mchat , the early screening of autistic traits uestion nai re , and the first year in ventory initial data on mchat and its predecessor ch at on children aged months suggest s that it is best used in a clinical setting and that it has low sens itiv ity many false negative s but good specific ity few false positive s . it may be more accurate to precede these tests with a broad band screen er that does not distinguish asd from other developmental disorders . screening tools designed for one culture s norms for behaviors lie eye contact may be in appropriate for a different culture . although genetic screening for autism is generally still im practical , it can be considered in some cases , such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic feature s . diagnosis diagnosis is based on behavior , not cause or mechanism . autism is defined in the dsmivtr as ehibit ing at least si symptoms total , including at least two symptoms of ualitative impairment in social inter action , at least one symptom of ualitative impairment in communication , and at least one symptom of restricted and repetitive behavior . sample symptoms include lac of social or emotional reciprocity , stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language , and persistent pre occupation with parts of obects . onset must be prior to age three years , with delay s or abnormal functioning in either social inter action , language as used in social communication , or symbol ic or imaginative play . the disturbance must not be better account ed for by rett syndrome or childhood disintegrative disorder . ic d uses essentially the same definit ion . several diagnostic instruments are available . two are common ly used in autism research the autism diagnostic inter view revised adir is a semistructured parent inter view , and the autism diagnostic observation sche du le ados uses observation and inter action with the child . the childhood autism rating scale cars is used widely in clinical environ ments to assess severity of autism based on observation of children . a pediatric ian common ly perform s a preliminary investig ation by taing developmental history and physical ly eamin ing the child . if warrant ed , diagnosis and evaluations are conducted with help from asd special ists , observ ing and assess ing cognitive , communication , family , and other factors using standard ied tools , and taing into account any associated medical conditions . a pediatric neuro psych olog ist is often ased to assess behavior and cognitive sills , both to aid diagnosis and to help recommend educational interventions . a different ial diagnosis for asd at this stage might also consider mental retardation , hearing impairment , and a specific language impairment such as landau leffner syndrome . the presence of autism can mae it hard er to diagnose coe ist ing psychiatric disorders such as depression . clinical genetic s evaluations are often done once asd is diagnosed , particular ly when other symptoms already suggest a genetic cause . although genetic technology allow s clinical genetic ists to l in an estimated of cases to genetic causes , consensus guide lines in the us and u are limited to high resolution chromosome and fragil e test ing . a genotype first model of diagnosis has been proposed , which would routine ly assess the genome s copy number variation s . as new genetic tests are developed several ethical , legal , and social issues will emerge . commercial avail ability of tests may precede adeuate understanding of how to use test results , given the comple ity of autism s genetic s . metabol ic and neuro imaging tests are sometimes help ful , but are not routine . asd can sometimes be diagnosed by age months , although diagnosis become s increasing ly st able over the first three years of life for eample , a one yearold who meet s diagnostic criteria for asd is less liely than a three yearold to continue to do so a few years later . in the u the national autism plan for children recommend s at most wees from first concern to completed diagnosis and assess ment , though few cases are hand led that uicly in practice . a us study found the average age of formal asd diagnosis was . years , far above recommend ations , and that of children remained un diagnosed at age years . although the symptoms of autism and asd begin early in childhood , they are sometimes missed years later , adults may see diagnose s to help them or their friends and family under st and themselves , to help their employers mae adustments , or in some loc ations to claim dis ability living allow ance s or other benefits . under diagnosis and over diagnosis are problems in marginal cases , and much of the recent increase in the number of reported asd cases is liely due to changes in diagnostic practice s . the increasing popular ity of drug treatment options and the epansion of benefits has given provide rs in centives to diagnose asd , resulting in some over diagnosis of children with un certain symptoms . converse ly , the cost of screening and diagnosis and the challenge of obtain ing pay ment can in hibit or delay diagnosis . it is particular ly hard to diagnose autism among the visual ly impaired , part ly because some of its diagnostic criteria depend on vision , and part ly because autistic symptoms overlap with those of common blind ness syndrome s or blind ism s . management the main goal s when treat ing children with autism are to less en associated deficits and family dis tress , and to increase uality of life and functional independence . no single treatment is best and treatment is typical ly tailored to the child s needs . families and the educational system are the main re sources for treatment . studies of interventions have methodological problems that prevent definit ive conclusion s about efficacy . although many psych o social interventions have some positive evidence , suggest ing that some form of treatment is prefer able to no treatment , the methodological uality of systematic review s of these studies has generally been poor , their clinical results are mostly tentat ive , and there is little evidence for the relative effective ness of treatment options . intensive , sustained special education programs and behavior therapy early in life can help children acuire self care , social , and ob sills , and often improve functioning and decrease symptom severity and maladapt ive behaviors claim s that intervention by around age three years is crucial are not substantia ted . available approaches include applied behavior analysis aba , developmental model s , structure d teaching , speech and language therapy , social sills therapy , and occupation al therapy . educational interventions can be effective to varying degrees in most children intensive aba treatment has demonstrat ed effective ness in enhanc ing global functioning in pre school children and is well established for improv ing intellectual performance of young children . neuropsychological reports are often poor ly communicate d to educator s , resulting in a gap between what a report recommend s and what education is provided . it is not nown whether treatment programs for children lead to significant improvements after the children grow up , and the limited research on the effective ness of adult residential programs show s m ied results . the appropriate ness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subect of current debate among educator s and research ers . many medications are used to treat asd symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavior al treatment fail s . more than half of us children diagnosed with asd are pres cribed psych o active drug s or anti convulsant s , with the most common drug class es being anti depressant s , stimulant s , and antipsychotic s . a side from antipsychotic s , there is sc ant reliable research about the effective ness or safety of drug treatment s for adolesc ents and adults with asd . a person with asd may respond a typical ly to medications , the medications can have adverse effects , and no nown medic ation relieves autism s core symptoms of social and communication impairment s . eperiments in mice have reversed or reduced some symptoms related to autism by replac ing or modulat ing gene function , suggest ing the possibility of target ing the rapies to specific rare mutation s nown to cause autism . although many alternative the rapies and interventions are available , few are supported by scientific studies . treatment approaches have little empi rical support in uality of life contets , and many programs focus on success measures that lac predict ive validity and real world relevance . scientific evidence appears to matter less to service provide rs than program maret ing , training avail ability , and parent reuests . some alternative treatment s may place the child at ris . a study found that compared to their peers , autistic boys have significant ly thinner bones if on case in free die t s in , botc hed chel ation therapy illed a five yearold child with autism . treatment is epensive in direct cost s are more so . for some one born in , a us study estimated an average life time cost of net present value in dollars , in flationadusted from estimate , with about medical care , etra education and other care , and lost economic product iv ity . public ly supported programs are often in adeuate or in appropriate for a given child , and unreimbursed out of pocet medical or therapy epense s are associated with lielihood of family financial problems one us study found a average loss of annual income in families of children with asd , and a related study found that asd is associated with higher pro b ability that child care problems will great ly affect parent al employment . us states increasing ly reuire private health insurance to cover autism services , shift ing cost s from public ly funded education programs to private ly funded health insurance . after childhood , ey treatment issues include residential care , ob training and place ment , s euality , social sills , and e state planning . prognosis there is no nown cure . children recover occasionally , so that they lose their diagnosis of asd this occur s sometimes after intensive treatment and sometimes not . it is not nown how often recover y happen s reported rates in unselected sample s of children with asd have range d from to . most autistic children can acuire language by age or younger , though a few have developed communication sills in later years . most children with autism lac social support , meaning ful relationship s , future employment opportunities or self determi nation . although core difficulties tend to per s ist , symptoms often become less severe with age . few high uality studies address long term prognosis . some adults show mode st improve ment in communication sills , but a few decline no study has focused on autism after mid life . acuir ing language before age si , having an i above , and having a maret able s ill all predict better outcomes independent living is unlie ly with severe autism . a british study of adults who were diagnosed before as autistic children with i above found that achieved a high level of independence as adults , had some friends and were generally in wor but reuired some support , had some independence but were generally living at home and needed consider able support and supervis ion in daily living , needed special ist residential provision from facilities special iing in asd with a high level of support and very limited autonom y , and needed high level hospital care . a swedish study of adults that did not eclude low i found worse prognosis for eample , only achieved independence . a can ad ian study of young adults diagnosed with asd as pre school ers found outcomes ranging through poor , fair , good , and very good of these young adults had been employ ed at some point during their lives , mostly in vol unteer , sheltered or part time wor . changes in diagnostic practice and increased avail ability of effective early intervention mae it unclear whether these findings can be general ied to recent ly diagnosed children . epidemi ology most recent review s tend to estimate a prevalence of per , for autism and close to per , for asd , and per , children in the united states for asd as of because of in adeuate data , these number s may under estimate asd s true prevalence . pddnos s prevalence has been estimated at . per , , asperger syndrome at roughly . per , , and childhood disintegrative disorder at . per , . the number of reported cases of autism increased dramatic ally in the s and early s . this increase is largely attribut able to changes in diagnostic practice s , referr al pattern s , avail ability of services , age at diagnosis , and public aware ness , though un identified environmental ris factors can not be ruled out . the available evidence does not rule out the possibility that autism s true prevalence has increased a real increase would suggest direct ing more attention and fund ing toward c hanging environmental factors instead of continu ing to focus on genetic s . boys are at higher ris for asd than girls . the se ratio average s . and is great ly modified by cognitive impairment it may be close to with mental retardation and more than . without . although the evidence does not implic ate any single pregnancy related ris factor as a cause of autism , the ris of autism is associated with advanced age in either parent , and with diabetes , bleed ing , and use of psychiatric drug s in the mother during pregnancy . the ris is greater with older fathers than with older mother s two potential eplan ations are the nown increase in mutation burden in older sperm , and the hypothesis that men mar ry later if they carry genetic li ability and show some signs of autism . most professional s believe that race , ethnicity , and socio economic bac ground do not affect the occurrence of autism . several other conditions are common in children with autism . they include history a few eample s of autistic symptoms and treatment s were described long before autism was named . the t able tal of mar t in luther , compiled by his not etaer , mathesius , contains the story of a yearold boy who may have been severe ly autistic . luther reported ly thought the boy was a soul less mass of flesh possessed by the d evil , and suggested that he be suf foc ated , although a later critic has cast doubt on the vera city of this report . the earliest well document ed case of autism is that of hugh blair of borgue , as detailed in a court case in which his br other successful ly petitioned to annul blair s marriage to gain blair s in herit ance . the wild boy of aveyron , a fer al child caught in , showed several signs of autism the medical student ean itard treated him with a behavior al program designed to help him form social attachment s and to in du ce speech via imitation . the new latin word autism us english trans l ation autism was c oined by the swiss psych iatr ist eugen bleuler in as he was defining symptoms of schiophrenia . he derived it from the gree word auts , meaning self , and used it to mean morbid self admir ation , referr ing to autistic with drawal of the pat ient to his fantasies , against which any influence from outside become s an intolerable disturbance . the word autism first too its modern sense in when hans asperger of the vienna university hospital adopted bleuler s terminology autistic psych opath s in a lecture in german about child psych ology . asperger was investig at ing an asd now nown as asperger syndrome , though for various reason s it was not widely recognied as a separate diagnosis until . leo anner of the ohn s hopins hospital first used autism in its modern sense in english when he introduced the label early infantile autism in a report of children with striing behavior al similar ities . almost all the characteristic s described in anner s first paper on the subect , not ably autistic alone ness and insistence on same ness , are still regarded as typical of the autistic spectrum of disorders . it is not nown whether anner derived the term independent ly of asperger . anner s re use of autism led to decades of confus ed terminology lie infantile schiophrenia , and child psych iatry s focus on maternal depriv ation led to mis conceptions of autism as an in f ant s response to refrigerator mother s . start ing in the late s autism was established as a separate syndrome by demonstrat ing that it is life long , distinguish ing it from mental retardation and schiophrenia and from other developmental disorders , and demonstrat ing the benefits of involving parents in active programs of therapy . as late as the mid s there was little evidence of a genetic role in autism now it is thought to be one of the most herit able of all psychiatric conditions . although the rise of parent organiation s and the destigmati ation of childhood asd have deeply affected how we view asd , parents continue to feel social stigma in situation s where their autistic children s behaviors are perceived negative ly by others , and many primary care physic ian s and medical special ist s still epress some beliefs consistent with out d ated autism research . the inter net has help ed autistic individuals bypass nonverbal cues and emotional sharing that they find so hard to deal with , and has given them a way to form on line communities and wor remote ly . socio logical and cultural aspects of autism have developed some in the community see a cure , while others believe that autism is simply another way of being . references eternal lins albedo , or reflect ion coeffi cient , derived from latin albedo white ness or reflected sunlight , in turn from albus white , is the diffuse reflectivity or reflect ing power of a surface . it is defined as the ratio of reflected radiation from the surface to incident radiation upon it . being a dimension less fr action , it may also be epressed as a percent age , and is measure d on a scale from ero for no reflect ing power of a perfect ly blac surface , to for perfect reflect ion of a white surface . albedo depend s on the freuency of the radiation . when uoted unuali fied , it usually refers to some appropriate average across the spectrum of visible light . in general , the albedo depend s on the direction al distribution of incoming radiation . eception s are lambert ian surface s , which scatter radiation in all direction s according to a cosine function , so their albedo does not depend on the incident distribution . in practice , a bi direction al reflectance distribution function brdf may be reuired to characterie the scatter ing properties of a surface accurate ly , although the albedo is a very useful first approim ation . the albedo is an important concept in climat ology and astronomy , as well as in calculat ing reflectivity of surface s in le ed susta in able rating system s for building s . the average overall albedo of earth , its planet ary albedo , is to , because of the cover ing by clouds , but varies widely locally across the surface , depend ing on the ge ological and environmental feature s . the term was introduced into optics by ohann he in rich lambert in his wor photometria . terrestrial albedo albedo s of typical material s in visible light range from up to . for fresh snow , to about . for charcoal , one of the dar est substance s . deeply shadowed cav ities can achieve an effective albedo approach ing the ero of a blac body . when seen from a distance , the ocean surface has a low albedo , as do most forests , where as desert areas have some of the highest albedo s among land forms . most land areas are in an albedo range of . to . . the average albedo of the earth is about . . this is far higher than for the ocean primarily because of the contribution of clouds . human activ ities have changed the albedo via forest clear ance and farm ing , for eample of various areas around the glo be . however , uantific ation of this effect on the global scale is difficult . the classic eample of albedo effect is the snow temperature feedbac . if a snowcovered area warms and the snow melts , the albedo decrease s , more sunlight is absorb ed , and the temperature tends to increase . the converse is also true if snow forms , a cooling cycle happen s . the in ten s ity of the albedo effect depend s on the sie of the change in albedo and the amount of in sol ation for this reason it can be potential ly very large in the tropics . the earth s surface albedo is regularly estimated via earth observation satellite sens or s such as nasa s mo dis instruments on board the terra and aua satellite s . as the total amount of reflected radiation can not be directly measure d by satellite , a mathematical model of the brdf is used to trans late a sample set of satellite reflectance measure ments into estimate s of directionalhemispherical reflectance and bihemispherical reflectance e.g. . the earth s average surface temperature due to its albedo and the gree n house effect is currently about c. if the earth was froen entire ly and hence be more reflect ive the average temperature of the planet would drop below c if only the continental land mass es became covered by glaciers , the mean temperature of the planet would drop to about c. in contrast , if all the ice on earth were to melt a so called aua planet the average temperature on the planet would rise to ust under c. whitesy and blacsy albedo it has been shown that for many applic ations involving terrestrial albedo , the albedo at a particular solar enith angle can reason ably be approimate d by the proportion ate sum of two terms the directionalhemispherical reflectance at that solar enith angle , , and the bihemispherical reflectance , bar the proportion concerned being defined as the proportion of diffuse illumination . albedo can then be given as directionalhemispherical reflectance is sometimes referred to as blacsy albedo and bihemispherical reflectance as whitesy albedo . these terms are important because they allow the albedo to be calculat ed for any given illumination conditions from a nowledge of the in trinsic properties of the surface . astronomical albedo the albedo s of planet s , satellite s and asteroid s can be used to in fer much about their properties . the study of albedo s , their depend ence on wavelength , light ing angle phase angle , and variation in time comprises a maor part of the astronomical field of photometry . for small and far obects that can not be resolved by telescopes , much of what we now come s from the study of their albedo s . for eample , the absolute albedo can indicate the surface ice content of out er solar system obects , the variation of albedo with phase angle gives information about regolith properties , while unusual ly high radar albedo is indicative of high metallic content in asteroid s . ence ladus , a moon of s a turn , has one of the highest nown albedo s of any body in the solar system , with of em radiation reflected . another not able high albedo body is er is , with an albedo of . . many small obects in the out er solar system and asteroid belt have low albedo s down to about . . a typical come t nucleus has an albedo of . . such a dar surface is thought to be indicative of a primit ive and heavily space wea there d surface con taining some organ ic compound s . the overall albedo of the moon is around . , but it is strong ly direction al and non lambert ian , dis play ing also a strong opposition effect . while such reflectance properties are different from those of any terrestrial terra in s , they are typical of the regolith surface s of air less solar system bodies . two common albedo s that are used in astronomy are the vb and geometric albedo measuring b right ness when illumination come s from directly behind the observ er and the bond albedo measuring total proportion of electromagnetic energy reflected . their values can differ significant ly , which is a common source of confus ion . in detailed studies , the direction al reflectance properties of astronomical bodies are often epressed in terms of the five hape parameters which semiempiric ally describe the variation of albedo with phase angle , including a character iation of the opposition effect of regolith surface s . the correl ation between astronomical geometric albedo , absolute magnitude and diameter is a left frac right , where a is the astronomical albedo , d is the diameter in ilometers , and h is the absolute magnitude . eample s of terrestrial albedo effects illumination although the albedo temperature effect is best nown in colder , white r regions on earth , the maimum albedo is actually found in the tropics where year round illumination is greater . the maimum is addition ally in the northern hemisphere , varying between and degrees north . the minima are found in the subtropical regions of the northern and southern hemisphere s , beyond which albedo increase s without respect to illumination . small scale effects albedo wors on a small er scale , too . in sunlight , dar clothes absorb more he at and light coloured clothes reflect it better , thus allow ing some control over body temperature by eploit ing the albedo effect of the colour of eternal cloth ing . trees because forests are generally attribut ed a low albedo , as the maority of the ultraviolet and visible spectrum is absorb ed through pho to synthesis , it has been erroneous ly assumed that remov ing forests would lead to cooling on the ground s of increased albedo . through the evapotran spir ation of water , trees dis charge ecess he at from the forest can opy . this water va pour rises resulting in cloud cover which also has a high albedo , there by further increasing the net global cooling effect attribut able to forests . in season ally snowcovered one s , w inter albedo s of tree less areas are to higher than near by forest ed areas because snow does not cover the trees as read i ly . deciduous trees have an albedo value of about . to . where as coniferous trees have a value of about . to . . studies by the had ley cent re have investig ated the relative generally warming effect of albedo change and cooling effect of carbon seuestr ation on plant ing forests . they found that new forests in tropical and mid latitude areas tend ed to cool new forests in high latitude s e.g. siberia were neutral or perhaps warming . snow snow albedo s can be as high as . this , however , is for the ideal eample fresh deep snow over a feature less land scape . over antarctica they average a little more than . . if a marginal ly snowcovered area warms , snow tends to melt , lower ing the albedo , and hence leading to more snow melt the ice albedo positive feedbac . cryoconite , powdery windbl own dust con taining soot , sometimes reduces albedo on glaciers and ice she ets . water water reflect s light very different ly from typical terrestrial material s . the reflectivity of a water surface is calculat ed using the fresnel eu ations see graph . at the scale of the wavelength of light even wavy water is always smooth so the light is reflected in a locally specular manner not diffuse ly . the glint of light off water is a common place effect of this . at small angle s of incident light , waviness results in reduced reflectivity because of the steep ness of the reflectivity v s . incident angle curve and a locally increased average incident angle . although the reflectivity of water is very low at low and medium angle s of incident light , it increase s tremendous ly at high angle s of incident light such as occur on the ill um in ated side of the earth near the term in at or early morning , late afternoon and near the poles . however , as mention ed above , waviness causes an appreci able reduct ion . since the light specular ly reflected from water does not usually reach the view er , water is usually considered to have a very low albedo in spite of its high reflectivity at high angle s of incident light . note that white caps on wave s loo white and have high albedo because the water is foamed up , so there are many superimposed bubble surface s which reflect , add ing up their reflect iv ities . fresh blac ice ehibit s fresnel reflect ion . clouds cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperature s . different types of clouds ehibit different reflectivity , theoretical ly ranging in albedo from a minimum of near to a maimum approach ing . . on any given day , about half of earth is covered by clouds , which reflect more sunlight than land and water . clouds eep earth cool by reflect ing sunlight , but they can also serve as blanets to trap war m th . albedo and climate in some areas are affected by artificial clouds , such as those created by the contrail s of heavy commercial airliner traffic . a study following the burn ing of the uwaiti oil field s during irai occupation showed that temperature s under the burn ing oil fire s were as much as c colder than temperature s several miles away under clear s ies . aerosol effects aerosol s very fine part iclesdroplets in the atmosphere have both direct and in direct effects on the earth s radiative balance . the direct albedo effect is generally to cool the planet the in direct effect the particles act as cloud condens ation nuclei and there by change cloud properties is less certain . as per the effects are blac carbon another albedo related effect on the climate is from blac carbon particles . the sie of this effect is difficult to uantify the inter government al panel on climate change estimate s that the global mean radiative forcing for blac carbon aerosol s from fossil fuels is . w m , with a range . to . w m . other types of albedo single scatter ing albedo is used to define scatter ing of electromagnetic wave s on small particles . it depend s on properties of the material re fr active in de the sie of the p article or particles and the wavelength of the incoming radiation . see also references eternal lins a named a , plural a es is the first letter and vowel in the is o basic latin alphabet . it is similar to the ancient gree letter alpha , from which it derives . origin s the earliest certain ancestor of a is aleph also called aleph , the first letter of the phoenician alphabet which , by consisting entire ly of consonant s , is an a bad rather than a true alphabet . in turn , the origin of aleph may have been a pictogram of an o head in pro to sinaitic script influenced by egypt ian hieroglyph s , style d as a triangular head with two horns etended . in b.c.e . , the phoenician alphabet s letter had a line ar form that served as the base for some later forms . its name must have c or respond ed closely to the hebrew or arabic aleph . when the ancient grees adopted the alphabet , they had no use for the glottal stop the first phoneme of the phoenician pro nunci ation of the letter , and the sound that the letter denote d in phoenician and other semitic language s so they used an adapt ation of the sign to represent the vowel , and gave it the similar name of alpha . in the earliest gree inscriptions after the gree dar age s , d at ing to the th century bc , the letter rest s upon its side , but in the gree alphabet of later times it generally resembles the modern capital letter , although many local vari eti es can be distinguish ed by the shorten ing of one leg , or by the angle at which the cross line is set . the etruscans brought the gree alphabet to their civil iation in the italian peninsula and left the letter un changed . the romans later adopted the etrus can alphabet to write the latin language , and the resulting letter was pre served in the latin alphabet used to write many language s , including english . during roman times , there were many variation s on the letter a . first was the monumental or lapid ary style , which was used when in scrib ing on stone or other permanent medium s . for perishable surface s , what was used for everyday or utilitarian purpose s , a cursive style was used . due to the perishable nature of the surface s , these eample s are not as prevalent as the monumental . this perishable style was called cursive and numerous variation s have survived , such as mauscule cursive , minuscule cursive , semi cursive minuscule . there were also variants that were inter mediate between the monumental and the cursive . the nown variants include the early semiuncial , the uncial , and the later semiuncial . at the term in ation of the roman empi re th century ad , several variants of the cursive minuscule appeared through western europe . among these were the semi cursive minuscule of italy , the merov ing ian script in france , the visigothic script in spain , and the insula r or angloirish semiuncial or anglosaon mauscule , of great britain . by the th century , the caroline script , which was very similar to the present day form , was the principal form used in boo maing , before the advent of the print ing pres s . this form was derived through a combin ing of prior forms . th century italy saw the form ation of the two variants that are nown today . these variants , the italics and roman forms , were derived from the caroline script version . the italics form used in most current hand writing consists of a circle and vertical stroe , called latin alpha or script a . this slowly developed from the fifth century form resembl ing the gree letter tau in the hand s of dar age irish and english write rs . most print ed material uses the roman form consisting of a small loop with an arc over it . both der ive from the mauscule capital form . in gree hand writing , it was common to oin the left leg and horiontal stroe into a single loop , as demonstrat ed by the uncial version shown . many fonts then made the right leg vertical . in some of these , the serif that began the right leg stroe developed into an arc , resulting in the print ed form , while in others it was dropped , resulting in the modern hand written form . use in english in english , the letter a currently represent s si different vowel sound s a by itself freuently denote s the near open front unrounded vowel as in pad the open bac unrounded vowel as in father , its original , latin and gree , sound a close r , further front ed sound as in h are , which developed as the sound progress ed from father to ace in concert with a later orthographic vowel , the diphthong as in ace and maor , due to effects of the great vowel shift the more round ed form in water or its closely related cousin , found in was . the double a s eu ence is not a native english combin ation however it is used this way in some foreign words such as aaron and aardvar . a is the third most common ly used letter in english after e and t , and the second most common in spanish and french . in one study , on average , about . of letter s used in english tend to be a , while the number is . in spanish and . in french . a is often used to denote something or some one of a better or more pres tigious uality or status a , a or a , the best grade that can be as signed by teacher s for student s school wor a grade for clean restaurants alist celebrities , etc. . such association s can have a motiv at ing effect , as eposure to the letter a has been found to improve performance , when compared with other letter s . the letter a along with other letter s at the beginning of the alphabet are used in algebra to represent nown uantities . where as the letter s at the end of the alphabet , y , are used to denote unnown uantities . also , in geometry , the capital a , b , c etc. are used to denote seg ment s , line s , ray s , etc. . also , a is typical ly used as one of the letter s to represent an angle in a tri angle . in logic , a is used to sign ify the universal affirmat ive . finally , the letter a is used to denote s ied , as in a narrow sie shoe , or a small c up sie in a brassiere . use in other language s in most language s that use the latin alphabet , a denote s an open unrounded vowel , , or . an eception is saanich , in which a and st and for a close mid front unrounded vowel . in the , variants of a denote various vowel s . in sampa , capital a denote s the open bac unrounded vowel and lower case a denote s the open front unrounded vowel . related letter s and other similar characters comput ing codes other represent ations references eternal lins alabama is a state located in the southeastern region of the united states . it is bordered by tennessee to the north , georgia to the east , florida and the gulf of meico to the south , and mississippi to the west . alabama is the th most etensive and the rd most populous of the united states . at , alabama has one of the longest navig able in land water way s in the nation . from the american civil war until world war ii , alabama , lie many southern states , suffered economic hard s hip , in part because of continued depend ence on agriculture . despite the growth of maor industries and urban center s , white rural interests dominated the state legislature until the s , while urban interests and african americans were under represented . following world war ii , alabama eperience d growth as the economy of the state transition ed from one primarily based on agriculture to one with divers ified interests . the establ ishment or epansion of multiple united states armed forces install ations added to the state economy and help ed bridge the gap between an agricultural and industrial economy during the mid th century . the state economy in the st century is dependent on management , automotive , finance , manufacturing , aerospace , mineral etraction , health care , education , retail , and technology . alabama is unoffici ally nicnamed the yellowhammer state , after the state bird . alabama is also nown as the heart of diie . the state tree is the long leaf pine , the state f lower is the camellia . the capital of alabama is montgomery . the largest city by population is birmingham . the largest city by total land area is huntsville . the oldest city is mobile , founded by french colon ists . history etym ology the alabama people , a musogean speaing tribe whose members lived ust below the conflu ence of the coosa and tallapoosa river s on the upper reaches of the alabama river , served as the etym ological source of the names of the river and state . in the alabama language , the word for an alabama person is albaamo or various ly albaama or albamo in different dialects the plural form alabama person s is albaama ha . the word alabama is believed to have origin ated from the choctaw language and was later adopted by the alabama tribe as their name . the spelling of the word varies significant ly between sources . the first us age appears in three account s of the her nando de so to epedit ion of with garcilasso de la vega using alibamo , while the night of elv as and rodrigo ranel wrote alibamu and limamu , respect ive ly . as early as , the tribe was nown to the french as alibamo n with french maps identify ing the river as rivire des alibamo n s . other spelling s of the appell ation have included alibamu , alabamo , albama , alebamon , alibama , al ibamou , alabamu , and all ibamou . although the origin of alabama could be discern ed , sources disagree on its meaning . an article in the acsonville republican origin ated the idea that the meaning was here we rest . this not ion was popular ied in the s through the writings of aleander be aufort mee . eperts in the musogean language s have been un able to find any evidence to support such a trans l ation . scholars believe the word come s from the choctaw al ba meaning plant s or weeds and a mo meaning to cut , to trim , or to gather . the meaning may have been clear ers of the thicet or her b gather ers which may refer to clear ing of land for cultiv ation or to collect ing medic in al plant s . alabama is but one of many place names in the state of native american origin . pre european settlement indigenous people s of varying culture s lived in the area for thousands of years before european colon iation . trade with the northeast via the ohio river began during the burial mound period bc ad and continued until european contact . the agrarian mississippi an culture covered most of the state from ad to , with one of its maor center s being at the moundville archaeological site in moundville , alabama . analysis of art if acts recover ed from archaeological e cav ations at moundville were the basis of scholars formula t ing the characteristic s of the southeastern ceremonial comple secc . contrary to popular belief , the secc appears to have no direct lins to me so america n culture , but developed independent ly . the ceremonial comple represent s a maor component of the religion of the mississippi an people s it is one of the primary means by which their religion is understood . among the historical tribe s of native american people living in the area of present day alabama at the time of european contact were irouo ian speaing cheroee , and the musogean speaing alabama alibamu , chica saw , choctaw , cree , and oasati . european settlement the french founded the first european settlement in the region at old mobile , in . the city was moved to the current site of mobile in . this area was french from to , part of british west florida from to , and split between the united states and spain from to . thomas bassett , a loyal ist to the british monarch y , was one of the earliest white settlers in the state outside of the mobile area . he settled in the tombigbee settlement s , in what is now washington county , during the early s . what is now the counties of baldwin and mobile became part of spanish west florida in , part of the independent republic of west florida in , and was finally added to the mississippi territory in . the area maing up today s northern and central alabama and mississippi , then nown as the yaoo land s , had been claimed by the pro vince of georgia after . following the revolutionary war , it remained a part of georgia , although heavily disputed . with the eception of the immediate area around mobile and the yaoo land s , what is now central alabama was made part of the mississippi territory upon its cre ation in . the yaoo land s were added to the territory in , following the yaoo land sc and al . spain had ept a government al presence in mobile after . when andrew acson s forces occupied mobile in , he demonstrat ed the united states de fact o authority over the region , which effective ly ended spanish influence , although not its claim , while gain ing an unencumbered passage to the gulf of meico from the h inter land s of the territory . prior to the admission of mississippi as a state on december , , the more sparse ly settled eastern half of the territory was separate d and named the alabama territory . the alabama territory was created by the united states congress on march , . st . stephen s , now abandoned , served as the territorial capital from to . early state hood the u.s. congress selected huntsville as the site for the first constitutional convention of alabama after it was approved to become the nd state . from uly to august , , delegate s met to prepar e the new state constitution . huntsville served as the temporary capital of alabama from to , when the seat of state government was moved to cahaba in d all as county . cahaba , now a ghost town , was the first permanent state capital from to . alabama fever was already under way when the state was admitted to the union , with settlers and land speculators pour ing into the state to tae advantage of fer tile land su it able for cotton cultiv ation . part of the frontier in the s and s , its constitution provided for universal suffrage for white men . southeastern plant ers and trade rs from the upper south brought slaves with them as the cotton plant ations in alabama epanded . the economy of the central blac belt named for its dar , product ive soil was built around large cotton plant ations whose owners wealth grew largely from slave labor . the area also drew many poor , disfranchised people who became sub s ist ence farmers . alabama had a population estimated at under , people in , but it had increased to more than , people by . most native american tribe s were completely remov ed from the state within a few years of the passage of the indian removal act by congress in . from to , tuscaloosa served as the capital of alabama . on anuary , , the alabama legislature announced that it had voted to re move the capital city from tuscaloosa to montgomery . the first legislative session in the new capital met in december . a new capitol building was erected under the direction of stephen decatur but ton of philadelphia . the first structure burned down in , but was re built on the same site in . this second capitol building in montgomery remains to the present day . it was designed by barachi as holt of eeter , main e . by the population had increased to a total of , people , of which , were enslaved african americans and , were free people of color . civil war and reconstruction on anuary , , alabama declared its secession from the union . after remain ing an independent republic for a few days , it oined the confederate states of america . the confederacy s capital was initially located at montgomery . although comparat ive ly few battle s were fought in the state , alabama contributed about , soldiers to the american civil war . alabama s slaves were freed by the th amendment in . a company of cav al ry soldiers from huntsville , alabama oined n a than be dford for rest s battal ion in hopins ville , entucy . the company wor e new un i forms with yel low trim on the sleeves , collar and co at tails . this led to them being greeted with yellowhammer , and the name later was applied to all alabama troops in the confederate army . alabama was under military rule from the end of the war in may until its official rest or ation to the union in . from to , with most white citiens barred from voting , many african americans emerged as political leaders in the state . alabama was represented in congress during this period by three african american congress men eremiah haralson , benamin s . turn er , and ames t . rapier . following the war , the state was remained chief ly agricultural , with an economy t ied to cotton . during reconstruction , state legislat or s ratified a new state constitution in that created a public school system for the first time and epanded women s rights . legislat or s funded numerous public road and railroad proect s , although these were plagued with alleg ations of fraud and misappropri ation . organied resistance groups also tried to suppress the freedmen and republicans . be sides the shortlived original u lu l an , these included the p ale face s , night s of the white camellia , r ed shirts , and the white league . reconstruction in alabama ended in , when the democrats re gained control of the legislature and governor s office . they wrote another constitution in , and the legislature passed the blaine amendment , pro hibit ing public money from being used to finance religious affiliated schools . the same year , legislation was approved that called for racially segreg ated schools . railroad passenger cars were segreg ated in . more im crow laws were passed at the beginning of the th century to en force segregation in everyday life . the new constitution of alabama included electoral laws that effective ly disfranchised african americans and most poor whites through voting restrictions , including poll taes and literacy reuire ments . while the plant er class had persuaded poor whites to support these legislative efforts , the new restrictions resulted in their disfranchisement as well , due mostly to the im position of a cumulat ive poll ta . in , alabama had more than , african americans eligible to vote . by , only , had ual ified to register , although at least , blac voters were literate . by , more white alabamians than blac had been disfranchised , whites to , blacs . nearly all african americans had lost the ability to vote . the constitution reiter ated that schools be racially segreg ated . it also rest ated that inter racial marriage was illegal , although it had already been against the law since . further racial segregation laws were passed into the s ail s in hospital s in to ilets , hotels , and restaurants in and b us stop wa it ing rooms in . the rural dominated alabama legislature consistently under funded schools and services for the disfranchised african americans , but it did not relieve them of pay ing taes . partially as a response to chronic under fund ing of education for african americans in the south , the rosenwald fund began fund ing the building of what came to be nown as rosenwald school s . in alabama these schools were designed and the construction partially finance d with rosenwald fund s , which paid onethird of the construction cost s . the local community and state paid the rest . beginning in , the first rosenwald schools were built in alabama . a total of schools , teacher s house s , and several vocational building s had been completed in the state by . several of the surviving school building s in the state are now listed on the national register of historic places . continued racial dis crimi nation , agricultural depression , and the failure of the cotton crops due to boll we evil in f est ation led ten s of thousands of african americans to see opportunities in northern cities . they left alabama in the early th century as part of the great migration to industrial obs and better future s in northern industrial cities . the population growth rate in alabama see historical population s t able below dropped by nearly half from to , reflect ing this e migration . at the same time , many rural whites and blacs moved to the city of birmingham to wor in new industrial obs . birmingham eperience d such rapid growth that it was called the magic city . by the s , birmingham was the th largest city in the united states and had more than of the alabama s population . heavy industry and min ing were the basis of its economy . industrial development related to the demand s of world war ii brought a level of pro s per ity not seen since before the civil war . rural worers pour ed into the largest cities in the state for better obs and a higher standard of living . one eample of this massive influ of worers can be shown by what happened in mobile . between and , more than , people moved into the city to wor for war effort industries . cotton and other cash crops faded in importance as the state developed a manufacturing and service base . despite massive population changes in the state from to , the rural dominated legislature refused to reap port ion house and senate seats based on population . they held on to old represent ation to maintain political and economic power in agricultural areas . in addition , the state legislature gerrymandered the few birmingham legislative seats to ensure election by person s living outside birmingham . one result was that efferson county , con taining birmingham s industrial and economic power house , contributed more than onethird of all ta revenue to the state , but did not receive a proportion al amount in services . urban interests were consistently under represented in the legislature . a study noted that because of rural domin ation , a minority of about per cent of the total state population is in maority control of the alabama legislature . african americans were presumed part ial to republicans for historical reason s , but they were disfranchised . white alabama n s felt bitter toward s the republican party in the after ma th of the civil war and reconstruction . these factors created a long st and ing tradition that any candidate who wanted to be vi able with white voters had to run as a democrat regard less of political beliefs . although efforts had already start ed decades earlier , african americans began to more active ly attempt to end the disfranchisement and segregation in the state during the s and s with the civil rights movement . these efforts directly led to the enactment of the civil rights act of and voting rights act of by the u.s. congress . during the s , under governor george wallace , failed attempt s were made at the state level to resist federal ly sanct ion ed de segregation efforts . during the civil rights movement , african americans achieved a protect ion of voting and other civil rights through the passage of the national civil rights act of , and the voting rights act of . legal segregation ended in the states as im crow laws were in valid ated or repealed . under the voting rights act of , cases were fil ed in federal court s to force alabama to re district by population both the house and senate of the state legislature . in , for the first time since , the legislature implemented the alabama constitution s provision for period ic re district ing based on population . this be nefited the urban areas that had developed , as well as all in the population who had been under represented for more than years . geography alabama is the thirtieth largest state in the united states with of total area . of the area is water , maing alabama rd in the amount of surface water , also giving it the second largest in land water way system in the u.s. . about three fifth s of the land area is a gentle plain with a general descent toward s the mississippi river and the gulf of meico . the north alabama region is mostly mountainous , with the tennessee river cut t ing a large valley creating numerous cree s , streams , river s , mountains , and laes . the states border ing alabama are tennessee to the north georgia to the east florida to the south and mississippi to the west . alabama has coast line at the gulf of meico , in the etreme southern ed ge of the state . alabama range s in e lev ation from sea level at mobile bay to over , feet m in the appalachian mountains in the northeast . the highest point is mount cheaha , at a h eight of . alabama s land consists of of forest or of total land area . sub urban baldwin county , along the gulf coast , is the largest county in the state in both land area and water area . areas in alabama administered by the national par service include horse shoe be nd national military par near aleander city little river can y on national pre serve near fort pay ne russell cav e national monument in bridge port tusegee air men national historic site in tusegee and tusegee institute national historic site near tusegee . addition ally , alabama has four national forests con ecuh , talladega , tusegee , and william b. ban head . alabama also contains the natche trace par way , the selma to montgomery national historic trail , and the trail of tears national historic trail . a not able natural won der in alabama is natural bridge roc , the longest natural bridge east of the roc ies , located ust south of haley ville . a wide meteorite impact crater is located in el more county , ust north of montgomery . this is the wetumpa crater , the site of alabama s greatest natural dis aster . a wide meteorite hit the area about million years ago . the hills ust east of down town wetumpa show case the eroded remains of the impact crater that was blasted into the be d roc , with the area label ed the wetumpa crater or astrobleme starwound because of the con cent ric rings of frac tures and one s of shattered roc that can be found be neath the surface . in , christian oeberl with the institute of geochemistry university of vienna published evidence and established the site as th recognied impact crater on earth . the northern most point of alabama lie s approimate ly si miles north west of water loo in lauderdale county in the far north west corner of the state . the southern most point is s and island , near dauph in island , in mobile county . the eastern most point lie s eight miles south east of fort mitchell in russell county on the georgia border . the western most point is the southern third of the mississippi state line , end ing near the town of melvin in choctaw county . urban areas climate the state is class ified as hu mid subtropical cfa under the oppen climate classific ation . the average annual temperature is f c . temperature s tend to be war mer in the southern part of the state with its pro im ity to the gulf of meico , while the northern parts of the state , especially in the appalachian mountains in the northeast , tend to be s light ly cool er . generally , alabama has very hot summers and mild winters with copious precipit ation throughout the year . alabama receive s an average of of rainf all annual ly and enoys a lengthy grow ing season of up to days in the southern part of the state . summers in alabama are among the hot test in the u.s. , with high temperature s averag ing over throughout the summer in some parts of the state . alabama is also prone to tropical storm s and even hurricane s . areas of the state far away from the gulf are not immune to the effects of the storm s , which often dump tremendous amount s of rain as they move in land and weaen . south alabama reports many thunderstorms . the gulf coast , around mobile bay , average s between and days per year with th under reported . this activity decrease s some what further north in the state , but even the far north of the state reports th under on about days per year . occasionally , thunderstorms are severe with freuent lightning and large h ail the central and northern parts of the state are most vulnerable to this type of storm . alabama rans seven th in the number of deaths from lightning and ninth in the number of deaths from lightning strie s per capita . alabama , along with ansas , has the most reported ef tornadoes of any state , according to statistics from the national climat ic data center for the period anuary , , to october , . several long traced f tornadoes have contributed to alabama report ing more tornado f at al ities than any other state , even sur pass ing teas which has a much large r area within tornado alley . the state suffered tremendous damage in the super outbrea of april , and the april , tornado outbrea . the outbrea in april produced a record amount of tornadoes in the state . the tal ly reach ed . the pe a season for tornadoes varies from the northern to southern parts of the state . alabama is one of the few places in the world that has a secondary tornado season in november and december , along with the spring severe wea the r season . the northern part of the state along the tennessee valley is one of the areas in the u.s. most vulnerable to violent tornadoes . the area of alabama and mississippi most affected by tornadoes is sometimes referred to as diie alley , as distinct from the tornado alley of the southern plain s . winters are generally mild in alabama , as they are throughout most of the southeastern u.s. , with average anuary low temperature s around in mobile and around in birmingham . although snow is a rare event in much of alabama , areas of the state north of montgomery may receive a dust ing of snow a few times every w inter , with an occasional moderately heavy snowfall every few years . historic snowfall events include new year s eve snow storm and the storm of the century . the annual average snowfall for the birmingham area is per year . in the southern gulf coast , snowfall is less freuent , sometimes going several years without any snowfall . alabama s highest temperature of was record ed on september , in the un incorporated community of center ville . the record low of occurred on anuary , in new maret . flora and fauna alabama is home to a diverse ar ray of flora and fauna , due largely to a variety of hab itats that range from the tennessee valley , appalachian plateau , and rid ge and valley appalachian s of the north to the piedmont , can ebrae and blac belt of the central region to the gulf coast al plain and be aches along the gulf of meico in the south . the state is usually raned among the top in nation for its range of overall bio divers ity . alabama once boasted hu ge epanses of pine forest , which still form the largest proportion of forests in the state . it currently rans fifth in the nation for the divers ity of its flora . it is home to nearly , pteridophyte and sperm atophyte plant species . indigenous animal species in the state include mammal species , rep tile species , amphib ian species , roughly native fresh water fish species , and bird species that spend at least part of their year within the state . in verteb rates include crayfish species and mollus species . of these mollus species have never been collect ed outside of the state . demographics the united states census bureau estimate s that the population of alabama was , , on uly , , a . increase since the census . the u.s. census bureau , as of uly , , estimated alabama s population at , , , which represent s an increase of , , or . , since the last census in . this include s a natural increase since the last census of , people that is , birth s min us , deaths and an increase due to net migration of , people into the state . im migration from outside the u.s. resulted in a net increase of , people , and migration within the country produced a net gain of , people . the state had , foreign born . of the state population , of which an estimated . were illegal immigrants , . the center of population of alabama is located in chilton county , outside of the town of emison . race and ancestry according to the census , alabama had a population of , , . in terms of race and ethnicity , the state was . white . non his panic white alone , . blac or african american , . american indian and alasa native , . as ian , . native hawai ian and other pacific island er , . from some other race , and . from two or more race s . his panic s or latin os of any race made up . of the population . in , . of alabama s population younger than age were minor ities . the largest reported ancestry groups in alabama are african american . , english . , irish . , german . , and scotsirish . . those citing american ancestry in alabama are of over whelm ing ly english etraction , however most english american s identify simply as having american ancestry because their roots have been in north america for so long , in some cases since the s . demographers estimate that a minimum of of people in alabama are of predominant ly english ancestry and state that the figure is probably much higher . in the census , of the people in alabama cited that they were of english ancestry , maing them the largest ethnic group at the time . there are also many more people in alabama of scotsirish origin s than are self reported . many people in alabama claim irish ancestry because of the term scotsirish , but most of the time in alabama this term is used for those with scottish roots , rather than irish . in , under the davis strong act , the state legislature established the alabama indian affair s commission and official ly recognied seven american indian tribe s . now epanded to nine , these include the poarch band of cree indian s , mowa band of choctaw indian s , star cl an of muscogee cree s , echota cheroee tribe of alabama , cheroee s of northeast alabama , cheroee s of south east alabama , mac his lower cree indian tribe , piua s ept of ohio shawnee tribe , and united cheroee aniyunwiya nation . religion christian ity alabama is located in the middle of the bible belt , a region of high christian followers . alabama has been identified as one of the most religious states in the us , with about of the population attend ing church regularly . a maority of people in the state identify as protestant . as of , the three largest denomi national groups in alabama are evangelical protestant , main line protestant , and catholic . the southern bapt ist convention has the highest number of adherents in alabama with , , , followed by the united method ist church with , members , and the catholic church with , adherents . in a survey , nearly of respond ents could name all four of the christian gospels . of those who indicate d a religious prefer ence , said they possessed a full understanding of their faith and needed no further learning . in a poll , of alabamians reported having at least some confidence in church es in the state . in the american religious identific ation survey , of alabama respond ents reported their religion as christian , as catholic , and as having no religion . other faith s although in much small er number s , many other religious faith s are represented in the state as well , including uda ism , islam , hindu ism , buddh ism , sih ism , and the bah faith . ews have been present in what is now alabama since , during the colonial era of mobile . the oldest ewish congreg ation in the state is congreg ation shaarai shomayim in mobile . it was formal ly recognied by the state legislature on anuary , . ewish de nomination s in the state include two orthodo , four conservative , ten reform , and one human ist ic synagogue . muslim has seen a grow ing presence in alabama , with mosues built by , with many by blac con verts . there are several hindu temple s and cultural center s in the state , the most well nown being the shri swaminarayan mandir in birmingham , the hindu temple and cultural center of birmingham in pelham , the hindu cultural center of north alabama in caps haw , and the hindu mandir and cultural center in tuscaloosa . there are si dharma center s and organiation s for the ravada buddh ists . most monastic buddh ist temple s are concentrated in southern mobile county , near bayou la batre . this area saw an influ of refugees from cambodia , laos , and south vietnam during the s and there after . there are four temple s within a tenmile radius of bayou la batre , including chua chanh giac , wat buddh arasa , and wat lao phoutthavihan . health a center s for disease control and prevent ion study in showed that ob es ity in alabama was a problem , with most counties having over of adults obese , ecept for ten which had a rate between and . residents of the state , along with those in five other states , were least liely in the nation to be physical ly active during leisure time . alabama , and the southeastern u.s. in general , has one of the highest in cidences of adult onset diabetes in the country , eceed ing of adults . economy the state has in vested in aerospace , education , health care , ban ing , and various heavy industries , including automobile manufacturing , mineral etraction , steel production and fabric ation . by , crop and animal production in alabama was value d at . billion . in contrast to the primarily agricultural economy of the previous century , this was only about of the state s gross dom est ic product . the number of private farm s has decline d at a steady rate since the s , as land has been sold to develop ers , timber companies , and large farm ing con glo me rates . occupation s outside of agriculture were widespread by . employment in that year was , in management occupation s , in business and financial operations , in comput er related and mathematical occupation , in architecture and engineering , in life , physical , and social sciences , in community and social services , in legal occupation s , in education , training , and library services , in art , design and media occupation s , in health care , in fire fight ing , law enforcement , and security , in food prepar ation and serving , in building and ground s clean ing and maintenance , in personal care and services , in sales , in office and administration support , in farm ing , fish ing , and forest ry , in construction and min ing , g as , and oil etraction , in install ation , maintenance , and re pair , in production and , in transport ation and material moving . according to the u.s. bureau of economic analysis , the total gross state product was billion , or , per capita . alabama s gdp increased . from the previous year . the single largest increase came in the area of information . in , per capita income for the state was , . as of une , the state s un employment rate is . . largest employers according to the birmingham business ournal , the five employers which employ the most employees in alabama as of april were the net twenty largest , as identified in the birmingham business ournal in , included agriculture alabama s agricultural outputs include poultry and eggs , cattle , fish , plant nursery items , peanuts , cotton , gra in s such as corn and sorghum , vegetables , mil , soybean s , and pe aches . although nown as the cotton state , alabama rans between eighth and ten th in national cotton production , according to various reports , with teas , georgia and mississippi compris ing the top three . industry alabama s industrial outputs include iron and steel product s including cast iron and steel pipe paper , lumber , and wood product s min ing mostly coal plastic product s cars and trucs and apparel . also , alabama produce s aerospace and electronic product s , mostly in the huntsville area , the loc ation of nasa s george c. mar sh all space f light center and the u.s. army materiel command , headuartered at redst one arsenal . a great deal of alabama s economic growth since the s has been due to the state s ep and ing automotive manufacturing industry . located in the state are honda manufacturing of alabama , hyundai motor manufacturing alabama , mercedes be n u.s. international , and to yota motor manufacturing alabama , as well as their various suppliers . since , the automobile industry has generate d more than , new obs in the state . alabama currently rans th in the nation in automobile out put . steel produce rs nucor , ssab , thyssenrupp , and u.s. steel have facilities in alabama and employ over , people . in may , german steel mae r thyssenrupp selected alabama for a . billion steel production plant , with the pro mis e of , permanent obs . the hunt ref in ing company , a sub sidi ary of hunt con solid ated , in c. , is based in tuscaloosa and operates a refinery there . the company also operates term in al s in mobile , melvin , and moundville . vc america , in c. operates an optical disc replic ation and pacag ing plant in tuscaloosa . tour ism an estimated million tour ists annual ly visit the state . over , of these are from other countries , including from canada , the united ing dom , germany and apan . in , . million tour ists spent . billion providing an estimated , obs in the state . health care uab hospital is the only level i trauma center in alabama . uab is the largest state government employ er in alabama , with a wor force of about , . ban ing alabama has the headuarters of regions financial corporation , bbva compass , superior bancorp and the former colonial ban c group . birmingham based compass ban chshares was acuired by spanish based bbva in september , although the headuarters of bbva compass remains in birmingham . in november , regions financial completed its merger with am south ban corporation , which was also headuartered in birmingham . south trust corporation , another large ban headuartered in birmingham , was acuired by wachovia in for . billion . the city still has maor operations for wachovia and its now post ope rating ban well s far go , which include s a regional headuarters , an operations center camp us and a million dollar data center . nearly a do en small er bans are also headuartered in the birmingham , such as superior bancorp , serv is first and new south federal savings ban . birmingham also serves as the headuarters for several large in ve st ment management companies , including harbert management corporation . electronic s telecommunic ations provide r at t , former ly bell south , also has a maor presence in alabama with several large office s in birmingham . the company has over , employees and more than , contract employees . many commercial technology companies are headuartered in huntsville , such as the networ access company adtran , comput er graph ics company inter graph , design and manufacturer of it infra structure avo cent , and telecommunic ations provide r deltacom . cinram manufac tures and dis tributes th century fo dvds and bluray disc s out of their huntsville plant . construction rust international has gr own to include br as field gorrie , be , hoar construction and b. l . harbert international , which all routine ly are included in the engineering new s record l ists of top design , international construction , and engineering firm s . rust international was acuired in by washington group international , which was in turn acuired by s an francisco based urs corporation in . law and government state government the found ation al document for alabama s government is the alabama constitution , which was ratified in . at almost amendment s and , words , it is the world s longest constitution and is roughly for ty times the length of the u.s. constitution . there has been a significant movement to re write and modern ie alabama s constitution . this movement is based upon the fact that alabama s constitution highly central ies power in montgomery and leave s practical ly no power in local hand s . any policy changes proposed around the state must be approved by the entire alabama legislature and , freuently , by state referendum . one critic ism of the current constitution claim s that its comple ity and length were intentional to co d ify segregation and rac ism . alabama s government is divided into three eual branch es the legislative branch is the alabama legislature , a bicameral assembly composed of the alabama house of representatives , with members , and the alabama senate , with members . the legislature is responsible for writing , debat ing , pass ing , or defeat ing state legislation . the republican party currently holds a maority in both house s of the legislature . the legislature has the power to override a gubernatorial ve to by a simple maority most state legislature s reuire a twothirds maority to override a ve to . the eecutive branch is responsible for the eecution and oversight of laws . it is headed by the governor of alabama . other members of eecutive branch include the cabinet , the attorney general of alabama , the alabama secretary of state , the alabama state treasurer , and the state audi to r of alabama . the current governor of the state is republican robert be ntley . the lieutenant governor is republican ay ive y . the udicial branch is responsible for inter pret ing the constitution and apply ing the law in state criminal and civil cases . the highest court is the supreme court of alabama . the chief ustice of the alabama supreme court is republican chuc m alone . all sitting ustice s on the alabama supreme court are members of the republican party . the members of the legislature tae office immediate ly after the november elections . the state wide official s , such as the governor , lieutenant governor , attorney general , and other constitutional office s tae office in the following anuary . taes alabama levies a , , or percent personal income ta , depend ing upon the amount earned and fil ing status . tapayers are allow ed to deduct their federal income ta from their alabama state ta , and can do so even if taing the standard deduct ion . tapayers who fil e itemied deduct ion s are also allow ed to deduct federal social security and medic are taes . the state s general sales ta rate is . the collect ion rate could be substantial ly higher , depend ing upon addition al city and county sales taes . for eample , the total sales ta rate in mobile is and there is an addition al rest aurant ta of , which means that a diner in mobile would pay a ta on a me al . sales and ecise taes in alabama account for of all state and local revenue , compared with an average of about nation wide . alabama is also one of the few remain ing states that levies a ta on food and medicine . alabama s income ta on poor woring families is among the nation s very highest . alabama is the only state that levies income ta on a family of four with income as low as , , which is barely one uarter of the federal poverty line . alabama s threshold is the lowest among the states and the district of columbia with income taes . the corpo rate income ta rate is currently . . the overall federal , state , and local ta burden in alabama rans the state as the second least taburdened state in the country . property ta es are the lowest in the u.s. . the current state constitution reuire s a vote r referendum to raise property taes . since alabama s ta structure largely depend s on consumer spend ing , it is subect to high vari able budget structure . for eample , in alabama had an annual budget def ic it as high as million . local and county government alabama has counties . each county has its own elected legislative branch , usually called the county commission , which usually also has eecutive authority in the county . because of the restraint s placed in the alabama constitution , all but seven counties efferson , lee , mobile , madison , montgomery , shelby , and tuscaloosa in the state have little to no home rule . instead , most counties in the state must lob by the local legislation committee of the state legislature to get simple local policies such as was te dis posal to land use on ing . on november , , efferson county declared ban ruptcy . alabama is an alcohol ic be ve rage control state the government holds a monopo ly on the s ale of alcohol . however , counties can declar e themselves dry the state does not sell alcohol in those areas . politics during reconstruction following the american civil war , alabama was occupied by federal troops of the third military district under general ohn pope . in , the political coalition nown as the redeemers too control of the state government from the republicans , in part by suppress ing the african american vote . after , a coalition of whites passed laws to segreg ate and disenfranchise blac residents , a process completed in provision s of the constitution . provision s which disfranchised african americans also disfranchised poor whites , however . by more whites than blacs had been disfranchised , to , , although the impact was greater on the african american community , as almost all of its citiens were disfranchised . from through the s , the state did not redraw election district s as population grew and shifted within the state . the result was a rural minority that dominated state politics until a series of court cases reuired re district ing in . alabama state politics gained nation wide and international attention in the s and s during the american civil rights movement , when maority whites bureau cratic ally , and at times , violent ly resist ed protests for electoral and social reform . democrat george wallace , the state s only four term governor , was a controversial figure . only with the passage of the federal civil rights act of and voting rights act of did african americans re gain suffrage , among other civil rights . in , the alabama legislature passed , and republican governor b ob riley signed a resolution epress ing profound regret over slavery and its lingering impact . in a symbol ic ceremony , the bill was signed in the alabama state capitol , which house d congress of the confederate states of america . in , republicans won control of both house s of the legislature for the first time in years . elections state elections with the disfranchisement of african americans , the state became part of the solid south , a system in which the democratic party became essentially the only political party in every southern state . for nearly years , local and state elections in alabama were decided in the democratic party primary , with generally only to en republican challenge rs running in the general election . republicans hold all nine seats on the alabama supreme court and all ten seats on the state appell ate court s . until , no republicans held any of the court seats . this change also began , liely in part , due to the same perception by voters of democratic party efforts to disenfranchise voters again in . in that general election , the the nincumbent chief ustice of alabama , ernest c. horns by , refused to leave office after losing the election by approimate ly , votes to republican perry o . hoo per , s r . . horns by su ed alabama and def ian t ly remained in office for nearly a year before finally giving up the seat after losing in court . this ultimate ly led to a collapse of support for democrats at the ballot bo in the net three or four election cycle s . the democrats lost the last of the nine teen court seats in august with the resig nation of the last democrat on the be nch . republicans hold all seven of the state wide elected eecutive branch office s . republicans hold si of the eight elected seats on the alabama state board of education . in , republicans too large maor ities of both chambers of the state legislature giving them control of that body for the first time in years . democrats hold one of the three seats on the alabama public service commission . only two republican lieutenant governor s have been elected since reconstruction , one is ay ive y , the current lieutenant governor . local elections many local office s county commission ers , board s of education , ta assess or s , ta collect or s , etc. in the state are still held by democrats . local elections in most rural counties are generally decided in the democratic primary and local elections in metropolitan and sub urban counties are generally decided in the republican primary , although there are eception s . alabama s county sheriffs are elected in partisan race s and democrats still retain the maority of those post s . the current split is democrats , republicans , and one independent choctaw . however , most of the democratic sheriffs preside over rural and less populated counties and the maority of republican sheriffs preside over more urban sub urban and heavily populated counties . two alabama counties montgomery and calhoun with a population of over , have democratic sheriffs and five alabama counties with a population of under , have republican sheriffs autauga , coffee , d ale , coosa , and blount . as of , the state of alabama has one female sheriff , in m organ county , alabama , and nine african american sheriffs . federal elections the state s two u.s. senator s are efferson b. session s iii and ric hard c. shelby , both republicans . shelby was original ly elected to the senate as a democrat in and re elected in , but switch ed parties in november . in the u.s. house of representatives , the state is represented by seven members , si of whom are republicans o bonner , mie d . rogers , robert a der holt , morris . broos , mar th a ro by , and spencer bac hus and one democrat terri se well . education primary and secondary education public primary and secondary education in alabama is under the over view of the alabama state board of education as well as local oversight by county school board s and city board s of education . together , , individual schools provide education for , elementary and secondary student s . public school fund ing is appropriate d through the alabama legislature through the education trust fund . in f y , alabama appropriate d , , , for primary and secondary education . that represented an increase of , , over the previous fiscal year . in , over percent of schools made adeuate year ly progress ayp toward student pro ficiency under the national no child left behind law , using measures determined by the state of alabama . in , percent of schools met ayp . while alabama s public education system has improve d in recent decades , it lags behind in achieve ment compared to other states . according to u.s. census data , alabama s high school gradu ation rate is the four th lowest in the u.s. after entucy , louisiana and mississippi . the largest educational gain s were among people with some college education but without degrees . colleges and universities alabama s programs of higher education include four year public universities , two year community colleges , and private , under graduate and graduate universities . in the state are three medical schools university of alabama school of medicine , university of south alabama and alabama college of osteopathic medicine , two veter in ary colleges auburn university and tusegee university , a den tal school university of alabama school of dentistry , an optometry college university of alabama at birmingham , two pharmacy schools auburn university and samford university , and five law schools university of alabama school of law , birmingham school of law , cumberl and school of law , miles law school , and the thomas good e one s school of law . public , post secondary education in alabama is over seen by the alabama commission on higher education and the alabama department of post secondary education . colleges and universities in alabama offer degree programs from two year associate degrees to doctoral level programs . the largest single camp us is the university of alabama , located in tuscaloosa , with , enrol led for fall . troy university was the largest institution in the state in , with an enrol l ment of , student s across four alabama camp uses troy , do than , montgomery , and pheni city , as well as s ity learning site s in seven teen other states and el even other countries . the oldest institution s are the public university of north alabama in flor ence and the catholic church affiliated spring hill college in mobile , both founded in . accredit ation of academic programs is through the southern association of colleges and schools sacs as well as other subect focused national and international accredit ation age ncies such as the association for bibl ical higher education ab he , the council on occupation al education coe , and the accredit ing council for independent colleges and schools acics . according to the u.s. new s and world report , alabama had three universities raned in the top public schools in america university of alabama at , auburn university at , and university of alabama at birmingham at . sports teams alabama has several professional and semi professional sports teams , including four minor league base b all teams . venues alabama has four of the world s largest stadiums by s eating capacity talladega superspeedway in talladega , bryantdenny stadium in tuscaloosa , ordanhare stadium in auburn and legion field in birmingham . the talladega superspeedway motor sports comple hosts a series of nascar events . it has a s eating capacity of , and is the thirteenth largest stadium in the world and sith largest stadium in america . bryantdenny stadium serves as the home of the university of alabama football team has a s eating capacity of , . it is the fifth largest stadium in america and the eighth largest non rac ing stadium in the world . ordanhare stadium is the home field of the auburn university football team and has a s eating capacity of , . it is the twelfth largest college football stadium in america . legion field is home for the uab blaers football program and the papaohns.com bowl . it seats , . laddpeebles stadium in mobile serves as the home of the ncaa senior bowl , godaddy.com bowl , alabama mississippi all star classic and home of the university of south alabama football team . laddpeebles stadium open ed in and seats , . in , bryantdenny stadium and ordanhare stadium became the home s of the alabama high school athletic association state football champions hip games , nown as the super si . bryantdenny hosts the super si in oddnumbered years , with ordanhare taing the games in even number ed years . previous ly , the super si was held at legion field in birmingham . transport ation air transport ation maor airports with sustained commercial operations in alabama include birmingham shuttlesworth international airport bhm , huntsville international airport hsv , do than regional airport dhn , mobile regional airport m ob , montgomery regional airport mgm , and muscle shoals north west alabama regional airport msl . rail for rail transport , amtra sche dules the cre s cent , a daily passenger train , running from new yor to new orleans with stop s at anniston , birmingham , and tuscaloosa . roads alabama has five maor inter state roads that cross the state i run s north south roughly through the middle of the state i i travels from the central west border to birmingham , where i continues to the northeast corner of the state and i continues east toward s atlanta i origin ate s in montgomery and run s east northeast to the georgia border , providing a main thoroughf are to atlanta and i traverses the southern most port ion of the state , running from west to east through mobile . another inter state road , i , is currently under construction . when completed around it will connect birmingham with memp his , tennessee . in addition , there are currently five auili ary inter state routes in the state i in mobile , i in tuscaloosa , i around birmingham , i in huntsville , and i in gadsden . a sith route , i , will be created when i is rerouted along a new southern bypass of montgomery . a proposed northern bypass of birmingham will design ated as i . several u.s. high way s also pass through the state , such as us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , us , and us . there are four to ll roads in the state montgomery epress way in montgomery tuscaloosa bypass in tuscaloosa emerald mount a in epress way in wetumpa and b each epress in o range b each . in march , alabama raned among the top five wor st states on the american state litter scorecard , for overall poor effective ness and uality of its state wide public space clean lines s primarily road way and ad a cent litter removal s from state and related efforts . port s the port of mobile , alabama s only salt water port , is a busy sea port on the gulf of meico with in land water way access to the midwest by way of the tennessee tombigbee water way . the port of mobile is currently the th largest by to nn age in the u.s. . the state s other port s are on river s with access to the gulf . water port s of alabama , listed from north to south see also references further read ing eternal lins in gree mythology , achilles , ahilleus , was a gree hero of the troan war and the central character and greatest warrior of homer s iliad . achilles was said to be a demigod his mother was the nymph thetis , and his father , peleus , was the ing of the myrmidons . achilles most not able fe at during the troan war was the slay ing of the troan hero hector outside the gates of troy . although the death of achilles is not present ed in the iliad , other sources con cur that he was illed near the end of the troan war by paris , who shot him in the heel with an arrow . later leg end s beginning with a poem by statius in the st century ad state that achilles was in vulnerable in all of his body ecept for his heel . because of his death from a small wound in the heel , the term achilles heel has come to mean a person s point of wea ness . etym ology achilles name can be analyed as a combin ation of ahos grief and laos a people , tribe , nation , etc. in other words , achilles is an embodi ment of the grief of the people , grief being a the me raised numerous times in the iliad freuently by achilles . achilles role as the hero of grief forms an iron ic uta position with the convention al view of achilles as the hero of leo s glory , usually glory in war . laos has been con strued by gregory nagy , following leonard palmer , to mean a corps of soldiers , a must er . with this deriv ation , the name would have a double meaning in the poem when the hero is functioning right ly , his men bring grief to the enemy , but when wrong ly , his men get the grief of war . the poem is in part about the mis direction of anger on the part of leadership . the name achilleus was a common and attested name among the grees soon after the th century bc . it was also turned into the female form achillea attested in attica in the th century bc ig ii and , in the form achillia , on a st ele in halicarnassus as the name of a female gladiator fight ing an amaon . roman gladiator ial games often reference d classical mythology , and this seems to reference achilles fight with penthesilea but gives it an etra tw ist of achilles being played by a woman . birth achilles was the son of the nymph thetis and peleus , the ing of the myrmidons . eus and poseidon had been rival s for the hand of thetis until pro metheus , the for e thiner , warned eus of a pro phecy that thetis would bear a son greater than his father . for this reason , the two god s with drew their pursuit , and had her wed peleus . as with most mythology , there is a ta le which offer s an alternative version of these events in argonautica iv . eus sister and wife hera alludes to thetis chaste resistance to the advances of eus , that thetis was so loyal to hera s marriage bond that she cool ly reected him . thetis , although a daughter of the sea god nereus , was also brought up by hera , further eplain ing her resistance to the advances of eus . according to the achilleid , written by statius in the st century ad , and to no surviving previous sources , when achilles was born thetis tried to mae him immortal , by dipp ing him in the river sty . however , he was left vulnerable at the part of the body by which she held him , his heel see achilles heel , achilles tend on . it is not clear if this version of events was nown earlier . in another version of this story , thetis anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire , to burn away the mortal parts of his body . she was inter rupted by peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage . however , none of the sources before statius mae s any reference to this general invulner ability . to the contrary , in the iliad homer mention s achilles being wound ed in boo the paeonian hero aster opaeus , son of pelagon , challenge d achilles by the river scamander . he cast two spear s at once , one gra ed achilles elbow , drawing a spurt of blood . also , in the fragment ary poem s of the epic cycle in which we can find description of the hero s death , cypria unnown author , aithiopis by arctinus of miletus , little iliad by le sche of mytilene , iliou per s is by arctinus of miletus , there is no trace of any reference to his general invulner ability or his famous wea ness heel in the later va se paintings present ing achilles death , the arrow or in many cases , arrow s hit his body . peleus entrusted achilles to ch iron the cent aur , on mt . pel ion , to be reared . achilles in the troan war the first two lines of the iliad read achilles con sum ing rage is at times wave r ing , but at other times he can not be cool ed . the human iation of achilles by the events of the war is an important the me of the narrative . according to the iliad , achilles arrived at troy with ships , each carry ing myrmidons boo . he appointed five leaders each leader command ing myrmidons men esthius , eudorus , peisander , phoeni and alcimedon boo . telephus when the grees left for the troan war , they accidentally stopped in mysia , ruled by ing telephus . in the resulting battle , achilles gave telephus a wound that would not heal telephus consult ed an oracle , who stated that he that wound ed sh all heal . guided by the oracle , he arrived at argos , where achilles heal ed him in order that he might become their guide for the voy age to troy . according to other reports in euripides lost play about telephus , he went to a ul is pre tend ing to be a be ggar and ased achilles to heal his wound . achilles refused , claim ing to have no medical nowledge . alternative ly , telephus held orestes for ransom , the ransom being achilles aid in heal ing the wound . odysseus reason ed that the spear had in flicted the wound therefore , the spear must be able to heal it . pieces of the spear were scraped off on to the wound and telephus was heal ed . troilus according to the cypria the part of the epic cycle that tells the events of the troan war before achilles wrath , when the achaean s desired to return home , they were rest rain ed by achilles , who after ward s attac ed the cattle of aeneas , saced neighbor ing cities and illed troilus . according to dar es phrygius account of the destruction of troy , the latin sum mary through which the story of achilles was trans mitted to medieval europe , troilus was a young troan prince , the young est of ing priam s or sometimes apollo and he cuba s five legitimate son s . despite his youth , he was one of the main troan war leaders . pro phecies lined troilus fate to that of troy and so he was ambushed in an attempt to capture him . yet achilles , struc by the beauty of both troilus and his sister polyena , and over come with l ust , directed his seual attention s on the youth who refusing to yield found instead himself decapit ated upon an altaromphalos of apollo . later version s of the story suggested troilus was accidentally illed by achilles in an over ardent lover s embrace . in this version of the myth , achilles death therefore came in re tri but ion for this sacrilege . ancient write rs treated troilus as the epitome of a dead child mourned by his parents . had troilus lived to adult hood , the first vati can myth ographer claimed troy would have been in vincible . achilles in the iliad homer s iliad is the most famous narrative of achilles deed s in the troan war . achilles wrath is the central the me of the boo . the homeric epic only cover s a few wees of the war , and does not nar rate achilles death . it begin s with achilles with drawal from battle after he is dis honor ed by agamemnon , the commander of the achaean forces . agamemnon had taen a woman named chryse is as his slave . her father chryse s , a priest of apollo , begged agamemnon to return her to him . agamemnon refused and apollo sent a plague among st the grees . the prophet calchas correct ly determined the source of the troubles but would not spea un less achilles vowed to protect him . achilles did so and calchas declared chryse is must be returned to her father . agamemnon consent ed , but then command ed that achilles battle prie briseis be brought to replace chryse is . angry at the dis honor of having his pl under and glory taen away and as he says later , because he love d briseis , with the urg ing of his mother thetis , achilles refused to fight or lead his troops along side the other gree forces . at this same time , burn ing with rage over agamemnon s the ft , achilles prayed to thetis to convinc e eus to help the troan s gain ground in the war , so that he may re gain his honor . as the battle turned against the grees , than s to the influence of eus , nestor declared that the troan s were winning because agamemnon had anger ed achilles , and urged the ing to appease the warrior . agamemnon agreed and sent odysseus and two other chief ta in s , a a and phoeni , to achilles with the offer of the return of briseis and other gifts . achilles reected all agamemnon offered him , and simply urged the grees to s ail home as he was planning to do . the troan s , led by hector , subseuently push ed the gree army bac toward the be aches and assaulted the gree ships . with the gree forces on the verge of absolute destruction , patroclus led the myrmidons into battle wearing achilles armor , though achilles remained at his camp . patroclus succeeded in push ing the troan s bac from the be aches , but was illed by hector before he could lead a proper assault on the city of troy . after receiv ing the new s of the death of patroclus from antilochus , the son of nestor , achilles grieved over his beloved companion s death and held many funeral games in his honor . his mother thetis came to comfort the dis traught achilles . she persuaded hephaestus to mae a new armor for him , in place of the armor that patroclus had been wearing which was taen by hector . the new armor included the shield of achilles , described in great detail by the poet . enr aged over the death of patroclus , achilles ended his refusal to fight and too the field illing many men in his rage but always seeing out hector . achilles even engaged in battle with the river god scamander who became angry that achilles was cho ing his water s with all the men he illed . the god tried to dr own achilles but was stopped by hera and hephaestus . eus himself too note of achilles rage and sent the god s to rest rain him so that he would not go on to sac troy itself , seem ing to show that the unhindered rage of achilles could defy fate itself as troy was not meant to be destroyed yet . finally , achilles found his pre y . achilles chase d hector around the w all of troy three times before athena , in the form of hector s favor it e and de a rest br other , deiphobus , persuaded hector to stop running and fight achilles face to face . after hector realied the tr ic , he new the battle was in evit able . w ant ing to go down fight ing , he charged at achilles with his only wea pon , his s word , but missed . accept ing his fate , hector begged achilles , not to spare his life , but to treat his body with respect after illing him . achilles told hector it was hope less to epect that of him , declar ing that my rage , my fury would dr ive me now to hac y our flesh away and eat you raw such agonies you have caused me . achilles then got his venge ance . with the as si stance of the god her mes , hector s father , priam , went to achilles tent to p lead with achilles to per mit him to perform for hector his funeral rites . achilles relented and promised a truce for the dur ation of hector s funeral . the final passage in the iliad is hector s funeral , after which the doom of troy was ust a matter of time . penthesilea achilles , after his temporary truce with priam , fought and illed the amaon ian warrior ueen penthesilea , but later grieved over her death . at first , he was so dis tracted by her beauty , he did not fight as intense ly as usual . once he realied that his dis tr action was end anger ing his life , he re focused and illed her . as he grieved over the death of such a rare beauty , a not orious gree eerer by the name of the r site s laughed and moced the great achilles . memnon , and the fall of achilles following the death of patroclus , achilles close st companion was nestor s son antilochus . when memnon , ing of ethiopia slew antilochus , achilles once more obtain ed re venge on the battlefield , illing memnon . the fight between achilles and memnon over antilochus echoes that of achilles and hector over patroclus , ecept that memnon unlie hector was also the son of a goddess . many homeric scholars argued that episode inspired many detail s in the iliad s description of the death of patroclus and achilles reaction to it . the episode then formed the basis of the cyclic epic aethiopis , which was composed after the iliad , possibly in the th century b. c. . the aethiopis is now lost , ecept for scatter ed fragment s uoted by later author s . the death of achilles , as predict ed by hector with his dying brea th , was brought about by paris with an arrow to the heel according to statius . in some version s , the god apollo guided paris arrow . some retellings also state that achilles was sc al ing the gates of troy and was hit with a poisoned arrow . all of these version s den y paris any so rt of valor , owing to the common conception that paris was a co ward and not the man his br other hector was , and achilles remained un defeated on the battlefield . his bones were m ing led with those of patroclus , and funeral games were held . he was represented in the aethiopis as living after his death in the island of leue at the mouth of the river danube . another version of achilles death is that he fell deeply in love with one of the troan prince sses , polyena . achilles as s priam for polyena s hand in marriage . priam is will ing because it would mean the end of the war and an alliance with the world s greatest warrior . but while priam is over seeing the private marriage of polyena and achilles , paris , who would have to give up helen if achilles married his sister , hides in the bushes and shoots achilles with a divine arrow , illing him . achilles was cre m ated and his ashes buried in the same urn as those of patroclus . paris was later illed by philoctetes using the enormous bow of hera cl es . fate of achilles armor achilles armor was the obect of a feud between odysseus and telamonian a a a a the greater . they competed for it by giving speech es on why they were the bravest after achilles to their troan prisoners , who after consider ing both men came to a consensus in favor of odysseus . f urious , a a cur s ed odysseus , which earned the ire of athena . athena temporarily made a a so mad with grief and anguish that he began illing sheep , thining them his com r ades . after a while , when athena lifted his mad ness and a a realied that he had actually been illing sheep , a a was left so ashamed that he committed suicide . odysseus eventual ly gave the armor to neoptolemus , the son of achilles . a relic claimed to be achilles br one headed spear was for centuries pre served in the temple of athena on the acropolis of phase lis , ly cia , a port on the pamphylian gulf . the city was visited in bc by aleander the great , who envisioned himself as the new achilles and carried the iliad with him , but his court biographers do not mention the spear , which he would in deed have touched with ecite ment . but it was being shown in the time of pausanias in the nd century ad . achilles and patroclus the eact nature of achilles relationship with patroclus has been a subect of dispute in both the classical period and modern times . in the iliad , it appears to be the model of a deep and loyal friends hip , but comment ators from classical antiuity to the present have often inter pret ed the relationship through the lens of their own culture s . in th century bc athens , the intense bond was often viewed in light of the gree custom of paid erasteia . in plato s symposium , the part icipants in a dialogue about love as s ume that achilles and patroclus were a couple phaedrus argues that achilles was the younger and more beautiful one so he was the beloved and patroclus was the lover . but ancient gree had no words to distinguish heteroseual and homoseual , and it was assumed that a man could both desire hand some young men and have se with women . although epic decorum eclude d eplicit s euality , the iliad indicate s that achilles had seual relations with women , with no direct evidence of seual behaviors with patroclus . worship of achilles in antiuity there was an archaic heroic cult of achilles on the white island , leuce , in the blac sea off the modern coast s of roman ia and uraine , with a temple and an oracle which survived into the roman period . in the lost epic aithiopis , a continu ation of the iliad attribut ed to artinus of miletos , achilles mother thetis returned to mourn him and remov ed his ashes from the pyre and too them to leuce at the mouth s of the danube . there the achaean s raised a tumulus for him and celebrated funeral games . pliny s natural history mention s a tumulus that is no long er evident insula achillis tumulo eius viri clara , on the island consecrated to him , located at a distance of fifty roman miles from peuce by the danube delta , and the temple there . pausanias has been told that the island is covered with forests and full of animals , some wild , some ta me . in this island there is also achilles temple and his statue . ruins of a suare temple met ers to a side , possibly that dedicated to achilles , were dis covered by captain riti ly in , but there has been no modern arc he ological wor done on the island . pomponius me la tells that achilles is buried in the island named achillea , between boristhene and ist er . the gree ge ographer dionysius per iegetus of bithynia , who lived at the time of dom it ian , write s that the island was called leuce because the wild animals which live there are white . it is said that there , in leuce island , re side the soul s of achilles and other heroes , and that they wander through the uninhabited valley s of this island this is how ove rewarded the men who had distinguish ed themselves through their virtues , because through virtue they had acuired ever last ing honor . the per i plus of the euine sea gives the following detail s it is said that the goddess thetis raised this island from the sea , for her son achilles , who d well s there . here is his temple and his statue , an archaic wor . this island is not in hab it ed , and goats grae on it , not many , which the people who happen to arr ive here with their ships , sacrifice to achilles . in this temple are also deposit ed a great many holy gifts , crater s , rings and precious stone s , offered to achilles in gratitude . one can still read inscriptions in gree and latin , in which achilles is p raised and celebrated . some of these are word ed in patroclus honor , because those who wish to be favored by achilles , honor patroclus at the same time . there are also in this island count less number s of sea bird s , which loo after achilles temple . every morning they f ly out to sea , we t their wing s with water , and return uicly to the temple and sprinle it . and after they finish the sprinl ing , they clean the h earth of the temple with their wing s . other people say still more , that some of the men who reach this island , come here intentional ly . they bring animals in their ships , destined to be sacrifice d . some of these animals they slaughter , others they set free on the island , in achilles honor . but there are others , who are forced to come to this island by sea storm s . as they have no sacrificial animals , but wish to get them from the god of the island himself , they consult achilles oracle . they as permission to slaughter the victim s chosen from among the animals that grae free ly on the island , and to deposit in e change the price which they consider fair . but in case the oracle den ies them permission , because there is an oracle here , they add something to the price offered , and if the oracle ref uses again , they add something more , until at last , the oracle a grees that the price is sufficient . and then the victim does nt run away any more , but wa its will ing ly to be caught . so , there is a great u ant ity of silver there , consecrated to the hero , as price for the sacrificial victim s . to some of the people who come to this island , achilles appears in dreams , to others he would appear even during their navig ation , if they were not too far away , and would instruct them as to which part of the island they would better anchor their ships . uoted in densuianu the heroic cult of achilles on leuce island was widespread in antiuity , not only along the sea lanes of the pontic sea but also in mar i time cities whose economic interests were tight ly connect ed to the rich es of the blac sea . achilles from leuce island was venerated as pontarches the lord and master of the pontic sea , the protect or of sailors and navig ation . sailors went out of their way to offer sacrifice . to achilles of leuce were dedicated a number of important commercial port cities of the gree water s achilleion in messenia stephanus by ant in us , achille ios in laconia pausanias , iii . , nicolae densuianu densuianu even though he recognied achilles in the name of auileia and in the north arm of the danube delta , the arm of chilia achileii , though his conclusion , that leuce had sovereign rights over pontos , evoes modern rather than archaic sea law . leuce had also a reputation as a place of heal ing . pausanias iii . , reports that the delphic pythia sent a lord of croton to be cur ed of a ch est wound . ammianus mar cell in us ii . at tributes the heal ing to water s aua e on the island . worship of achilles in modern times the achilleion in corfu in the region of gastouri to the south of the city of corfu gree ce , em pres s of austr ia elisabeth of bavar ia also nown as sissi built in a summer palace with achilles as its central the me and it is a monument to platonic roman ticism . the palace , natural ly , was named after achilles achilleion . this elegant structure abounds with paintings and statue s of achilles both in the main h all and in the lavish gardens depict ing the heroic and tragic scenes of the troan war . other st or ies some post homeric sources claim that in order to eep achilles safe from the war , thetis or , in some version s , peleus hides the young man at the court of lycomedes , ing of syros . there , achilles is dis guised as a girl and lives among lycomedes daughter s , perhaps under the name pyrrha the redhaired girl . with lycomedes daughter deidamia , whom in the account of statius he rapes , achilles there fathers a son , neoptolemus also called pyrrhus , after his father s possible ali as . according to this story , odysseus learns from the prophet calchas that the achaean s would be un able to capture troy without achilles aid . odysseus goes to syros in the guise of a peddler sell ing women s clothes and ewelry and places a shield and spear among his good s . when achilles instant ly taes up the spear , odysseus see s through his dis guise and convinc es him to oin the gree campaign . in another version of the story , odysseus ar range s for a trumpet al arm to be sound ed while he was with lycomedes women while the women f lee in panic , achilles prepar es to defend the court , thus giving his ident ity away . in boo of homer s odyssey , odysseus s ail s to the under world and converse s with the s had es . one of these is achilles , who when greeted as blessed in life , blessed in death , respond s that he would rather be a slave to the wor st of masters than be ing of all the dead . but achilles then as s odysseus of his son s eploit s in the troan war , and when odysseus tells of neoptolemus heroic actions , achilles is fill ed with satisf action . this leave s the read er with an ambiguous understanding of how achilles felt about the heroic life . achilles was worship p ed as a sea god in many of the gree colonies on the blac sea , the loc ation of the myth ical white island which he was said to in hab it after his death , together with many other heroes . the ing s of the epirus claimed to be descended from achilles through his son , neoptolemus . aleander the great , son of the epirote prince s s olympias , could therefore also claim this descent , and in many way s strove to be lie his great ancestor . he is said to have visited the tomb of achilles at achilleion while pass ing troy . in ad the roman emperor caracalla , while on his way to war against part hia , em ul ated aleander by holding games around achilles tumulus . achilles fought and illed the amaon helen e . some also said he married medea , and that after both their deaths they were united in the elysian field s of had es as hera promised thetis in apollo nius argonautica . in some version s of the myth , achilles has a relationship with his capt ive briseis . achilles in gree tragedy the gree tragedian aeschylus wrote a trilogy of play s about achilles , given the title achille is by modern scholars . the tragedies re late the deed s of achilles during the troan war , including his defeat of hector and eventual death when an arrow shot by paris and guided by apollo pun c tures his heel . et ant fragment s of the achille is and other aeschylean fragment s have been assemb led to produce a wor able modern play . the first part of the achille is trilogy , the myrmidons , focused on the relationship between achilles and chorus , who represent the achaean army and t ry to convinc e achilles to give up his uarrel with agamemnon only a few lines survive today . in plato s symposium , phaedrus point s out that aeschylus port ray ed achilles as the lover and patroclus as the beloved phaedrus argues that this is in correct because achilles , being the younger and more beautiful of the two , was the beloved , who love d his lover so much that he chose to die to re venge him . the tragedian sophocles also wrote the lover s of achilles , a play with achilles as the main character . only a few fragment s survive . achilles in gree philosophy the philosopher eno of ele a center ed one of his par a does on an imag in ary foo trace between swiftfooted achilles and a tortoise , by which he attempt ed to show that achilles could not catch up to a tortoise with a head start , and therefore that motion and change were im possible . as a student of the mon ist parmenides and a member of the eleatic school , eno believed time and motion to be illusions . achilles in later art the role of achilles has been played in film by achilles has freuently been mention ed in music names a es note s references bibl iography eternal lins abraham lincoln february , april , was the th president of the united states , serving from march until his assassin ation in april . lincoln led the united states through its greatest constitutional , military , and moral c rises the american civil war pre serving the union , abolish ing slavery , strength en ing the national government and modern iing the economy . reared in a poor family on the western frontier , lincoln was selfeducated , and became a country lawyer , a whig party leader , illinois state legislat or during the s , and a one term member of the united states house of representatives during the s . after a series of debates in that gave national visibility to his opposition to the epansion of slavery , lincoln lost a senate race to his arc h rival , stephen a . douglas . lincoln , a moderate from a s wing state , se cur ed the republican party presidential nomination in . with almost no support in the south , lincoln swept the north and was elected president in . his election was the signal for seven southern slave states to declar e their secession from the union and form the confederacy . the departure of the southern ers gave lincoln s party firm control of congress , but no formula for compromise or reconcil iation was found . lincoln eplain ed in his second inaugural address both parties deprec ated war , but one of them would mae war rather than let the nation survive , and the other would accept war rather than let it perish , and the war came . when the north enthusiastic ally rallied behind the national flag after the confederate attac on fort sumter on april , , lincoln concentrated on the military and political dimension s of the war effort . his goal was now to reunite the nation . as the south was in a state of insurrection , lincoln eercised his authority to suspend habeas corpus , ar rest ing and temporarily de taining thousands of suspected secession ists without trial . lincoln averted british re cognition of the confederacy by s ill ful ly handling the trent affair in late . his efforts toward the abolition of slavery include issu ing his emancipation proclamation in , encouraging the border states to outlaw slavery , and help ing push through congress the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution , which finally freed all slaves nation wide in december . lincoln closely supervis ed the war effort , especially the s election of top general s , including command ing general ulysses s . grant . lincoln brought leaders of the maor factions of his party into his cabinet and pressured them to cooper ate . under lincoln s leadership , the union set up a naval blocade that shut down the south s normal trade , too control of the border slave states at the start of the war , gained control of communication s with gunboats on the southern river system s , and tried repeated ly to capture the confederate capital at richmond , virginia . each time a general failed , lincoln sub stituted another until finally grant succeeded in . an eception ally astute politician deeply involved with power issues in each state , lincoln reach ed out to war democrats and manag ed his own re election in the presidential election . as the leader of the moderate fact ion of the republican party , lincoln found his policies and personal ity were blasted from all sides radical republicans demanded harsh er treatment of the south , war democrats desired more compromise , copperheads despised him , and ir reconcil able secession ists plotted his death . political ly , lincoln fought bac with patronage , by pitt ing his opponent s against each other , and by appeal ing to the american people with his power s of oratory . his gettysburg address of became the most uoted speech in american history . it was an iconic state ment of america s dedication to the principles of national ism , republicanism , eual rights , liberty , and democracy . at the close of the war , lincoln held a moderate view of reconstruction , seeing to reunite the nation speedi ly through a policy of generous reconcil iation in the face of lingering and bitter divis ive ness . si days after the surrender of confederate command ing general robert e . lee , however , lincoln was assassin ated by act or and confederate sympathier ohn wiles booth . lincoln s death was the first assassin ation of a u.s. president and sent the nation into mourn ing . lincoln has been consistently raned both by scholars and the public as one of the greatest u.s. president s . family and childhood early life abraham lincoln was born february , , the second child of thomas lincoln and nancy lincoln ne hans , in a one room log cab in on the s in ing spring farm in hard in county , entucy now larue county . he is descended from samuel lincoln , who arrived in hingham , mass achusetts , from norfol , england , in the th century . lincoln s paternal gr and father and name sae , abraham , had moved his family from virginia to entucy , where he was ambushed and illed in an indian raid in , with his children , including lincoln s father thomas , loo ing on . thomas was left to mae his own way on the frontier . lincoln s mother , nancy , was the daughter of lucy hans , and was born in what is now mineral county , west virginia , then part of virginia . lucy moved with nancy to entucy . nancy hans married thomas , who became a respect ed citien . he bought and sold several farm s , including no b cree farm . the family attend ed a separate bapt ists church , which had re strict ive moral standard s and opposed alcohol , danc ing , and slavery . thomas eno y ed consider able status in entucy where he s at on uries , app raised e states , served on country slave patrols , and guard ed prisoners . by the time his son abraham was born , thomas own ed two farm s , several town lots , lives to c , and horse s . he was among the rich est men in the county . however , in , thomas lost all of his land in court cases because of faulty property title s . the family moved north across the ohio river to free i.e. , non slave territory and made a new start in what was then perry county but is now spencer county , indian a . lincoln later noted that this move was part ly on account of slavery but main ly due to land title difficulties . in indian a , when lincoln was nine , his mother nancy died of mil sicness in . after the death of lincoln s mother , his older sister , sarah , too charge of car ing for him until their father re married in sarah later died in her s while giving birth to a still born son . thomas lincoln s new wife was the widow sarah bush ohn s ton , the mother of three children . lincoln became very close to his st ep mother , and referred to her as mother . as a pre teen , he did not lie the hard labor associated with frontier life . some in his family , and in the neighbor hood , for a time considered him to be lay . as he grew into his teen s , he will ing ly too responsibility for all cho re s epect ed of him as one of the boys in the house hold and became an ad ept aeman in his wor building rail fences . he attain ed a reputation for brawn and a uda city after a very competit ive wrestl ing match to which he was challenge d by the renowned leader of a group of ruffians , the cl ary s gr ove boys . lincoln also agreed with the custom ary oblig ation of a son to give his father all earn ing s from wor done outside the home until age . in later years , lincoln occasionally loaned his father money . lincoln became increasing ly distant from his father , in part because of his father s lac of education . while young lincoln s formal education con sisted approimate ly of a year s wor th of class es from several itinerant teacher s , he was mostly selfeducated and was an avid read er and often sought access to any new boos in the village . he read and re read the ing ames bible , aesop s fables , bunyan s pilgrim s progress , def oe s robinson crusoe , and franlin s autob iography . in , fear ing a mil sicness outbrea along the ohio river , the lincoln family moved west , where they settled on public land in mac on county , illinois , another free , non slave state . in , thomas re located the family to a new homestead in coles county , illinois . it was then that , as an ambitious yearold who was now old enough to mae his own decision s , lincoln struc out on his own . can oe ing down the sangamon river , lincoln ended up in the village of new salem in sangamon county . in the spring of , hired by new salem business man den ton of futt and accompanied by friends , he too good s by flatboat from new salem to new orleans via the sangamon , illinois , and mississippi river s . after arr iv ing in new orleans and witness ing slavery first hand he waled bac home . marriage and children lincoln s first roman t ic interest was an n rutledge , whom he met when he first moved to new salem by , they were in a relationship but not formal ly engaged . she died at the age of on august , , most liely of typhoid fever . in the early s , he met mary owens from entucy when she was visit ing her sister . late in , lincoln agreed to a match with mary if she returned to new salem . mary did return in november , and lincoln court ed her for a time however , they both had second thought s about their relationship . on august , , lincoln wrote mary a letter suggest ing he would not blam e her if she ended the relationship . she never replied and the court s hip ended . in , lincoln became engaged to mary todd , who was from a wealth y slave holding family in leington , entucy . they met in springfield , illinois , in december and were engaged the following december . a wed d ing set for anuary , , was can ce led when the two broe off their engage ment at lincoln s in itiat ive . they later met again at a party and married on november , , in the springfield man s ion of mary s married sister . while prepar ing for the nuptials and feel ing aniety again , lincoln , when ased where he was going , replied , to he ll , i suppose . in , the couple bought a house in springfield near lincoln s law office . mary todd lincoln ept house , often with the help of a relative or hired serv ant girl . robert todd lincoln was born in and ed ward ba er lincoln ed die in . lincoln was re mar ably fo nd of children , and the lincoln s were not considered to be strict with their children . ed ward died on february , , in springfield , probably of tuberculosis . willie lincoln was born on december , , and died on february , . the lincoln s four th son , thomas ta d lincoln , was born on april , , and died of heart failure at the age of on uly , . robert was the only child to live to adult hood and have children . his last descendant , gr and son robert todd lincoln bec with , died in . the deaths of their son s had profound effects on both parents . later in life , mary struggle d with the stress es of losing her husb and and son s , and robert lincoln committed her temporarily to a mental health asylum in . abraham lincoln suffered from melancho ly , a condition which now is referred to as clinical depression . lincoln s father in law was based in leington , entucy he and others of the todd family were either slave owners or slave trade rs . lincoln was close to the todd s , and he and his family occasionally visited the todd e state in leington . he was an affect ion ate , though often ab sent , husb and and father of four children . early career and militia service in , at age , lincoln and a partner bought a small general s to re on credit in new salem , illinois . although the economy was boo m ing in the region , the business struggle d and lincoln eventual ly sold his share . that march he began his political career with his first campaign for the illinois general assembly . he had attain ed local popular ity and could d raw crowd s as a natural raconteur in new salem , though he lac ed an education , powerful friends , and money , which may be why he lost . he advocated navig ation al improvements on the sangamon river . before the election , lincoln served as a captain in the illinois militia during the blac haw war . following his return , lincoln continued his campaign for the august election for the illinois general assembly . at , he was t all and strong enough to in tim i date any rival . at his first speech , when he saw a support er in the crowd being attac ed , lincoln grabbed the assailant by his nec and the seat of his trousers and threw him . lincoln finish ed eighth out of candidate s the top four were elected , though he received of the votes cast in the new salem precinct . lincoln served as new salem s post master and later as county survey or , all the while read ing voracious ly . he then decided to become a lawyer and began teaching himself law by read ing blac stone s comment aries on the laws of england and other law boos . of his learning method , lincoln stated i studied with no body . his second campaign in was successful . he won election to the state legislature though he ran as a whig , many democrats favored him over a more powerful whig opponent . admitted to the bar in , he moved to springfield , illinois , and began to practice law under ohn t . stu art , mary todd s cousin . lincoln became an able and successful lawyer with a reputation as a for mid able advers ary during cross eamin ations and c losing argument s . he partner ed with stephen t . log an from until , when he began his practice with william her nd on , whom lincoln thought a studious young man . he served four success ive terms in the illinois house of representatives as a whig represent at ive from sangamon county . in the legislative session , he voted to ep and suffrage to white male s , whether land owners or not . he was nown for his free soil stance of opposing both slavery and abolition ism . he first articul ated this in , say ing , the institution of slavery is founded on both in ustice and bad policy , but the pro mulg ation of abolition doctrine s tends rather to increase than ab ate its evil s . he closely followed henry clay in support ing the american colon iation society program of maing the abolition of slavery practical by help ing the freed slaves to settle in liberia in africa . congress man lincoln from the early s , lincoln was a steadfast whig and pro fessed to friends in to be , an old line whig , a disc iple of henry clay . the party , including lincoln , favored economic modern iation in ban ing , protect ive tariff s to fund internal improvements including railroad s , and espo used urban iation as well . in , lincoln was elected to the u.s. house of representatives , where he served one two year term . he was the only whig in the illinois deleg ation , but he showed his party loyal ty by part icipat ing in almost all votes and maing speech es that echoed the party line . lincoln , in col labor ation with abolition ist congress man oshua r . gidd ing s , wrote a bill to abolish slavery in the district of columbia with compens ation for the owners , enforcement to capture fugit ive slaves , and a popular vote on the matter . he abandoned the bill when it failed to garner sufficient whig supporters . on foreign and military policy , lincoln spoe out against the meican american war , which he attribut ed to president pol s desire for military glory that attract ive rain bow , that rises in show ers of blood . lincoln also supported the wilmot pro vi so , which , if it had been adopted , would have ban ned slavery in any u.s. territory won from meico . lincoln emphasi ed his opposition to pol by draft ing and introduc ing his spot resolution s . the war had be gun with a meican slaughter of american soldiers in territory disputed by meico and the u.s. pol in sisted that meican soldiers had in vaded our territory and shed the blood of our fel low citiens on our own soil . lincoln demanded that pol show congress the eact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on american soil . congress never enacted the resolution or even debate d it , the national paper s ignored it , and it resulted in a loss of political support for lincoln in his district . one illinois newspaper der is ive ly nicnamed him spot ty lincoln . lincoln later regret ted some of his state ments , especially his attac on the presidential war maing power s . reali ing clay was unlie ly to win the presidency , lincoln , who had pledged in to serve only one term in the house , supported general a ch ary taylor for the whig nomination in the presidential election . taylor won and lincoln hoped to be appointed commission er of the general land office , but that lucrat ive patronage ob went to an illinois rival , ust in but ter field , considered by the administration to be a highly s illed lawyer , but in lincoln s view , an old fossil . the administration offered him the con sol ation prie of secretary or governor of the oregon territory . this distant territory was a democratic stronghold , and accept ance of the post would have effective ly ended his legal and political career in illinois , so he decline d and resumed his law practice . prairie lawyer lincoln returned to practic ing law in springfield , handling every in d of business that could come before a prairie lawyer . twice a year for years , wees at a time , he appeared in county seats in the mid state region when the county court s were in session . lincoln hand led many transport ation cases in the mid st of the nation s western epansion , particular ly the conflict s a ris ing from the operation of river barges under the many new railroad bridge s . as a river boat man , lincoln initially favored those interests , but ultimate ly represented who ever hired him . his reputation grew , and he appeared before the supreme court of the united states , argu ing a case involving a can al boat that s an after hit t ing a bridge . in , he received a patent for a flot ation device for the movement of boat s in sh allow water . the idea was never commercial ied , but lincoln is the only president to hold a patent . in , he represented the al ton sangamon railroad in a dispute with one of its share hold ers , ames a . barret , who had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to buy share s in the railroad on the ground s that the company had changed its original train route . lincoln successful ly argued that the railroad company was not bound by its original charter in eistence at the time of barret s pledge the charter was am ended in the public interest to provide a new er , superior , and less epensive route , and the corporation retain ed the right to demand barret s pay ment . the decision by the illinois supreme court has been cited by numerous other court s in the nation . lincoln appeared before the illinois supreme court in cases , in as sole counsel , of which were decided in his favor . from to , another of lincoln s largest cli ents was the illinois central railroad . lincoln s most not able criminal trial occurred in when he defended william duff arm strong , who was on trial for the murder of ames pres ton met er . the case is famous for lincoln s use of a fact established by udicial notice in order to challenge the cred ibil ity of an eye witness . after an opposing witness test ified seeing the cri me in the moon light , lincoln produced a farmers almanac show ing the moon was at a low angle , drastic ally reduc ing visibility . based on this evidence , arm strong was acuitted . lincoln rare ly raised obect ion s in the court room but in an case , where he defended a cousin , peachy harrison , who was accused of stabb ing another to death , lincoln angri ly protested the udge s decision to eclude evidence favor able to his cl ient . instead of holding lincoln in contempt of court as was epect ed , the udge , a democrat , reversed his ruling , allow ing the evidence and acuitt ing harrison . republican politics slavery and a house divided by the s , slavery was still legal in the southern united states , but had been generally outlaw ed in the northern states , such as illinois . lincoln dis approved of slavery , and the spread of slavery to new u.s. territory in the west . he returned to politics to oppose the pro slavery ansas nebrasa act this law repealed the slavery re strict ing missouri compromise . senior senator stephen a . douglas of illinois had incorporated popular sovereignty into the act . douglas provision , which lincoln opposed , specified settlers had the right to determi ne locally whether to allow slavery in new u.s. territory , rather than have such a decision restricted by the national congress . eric foner contrast s the abolition ists and anti slavery radical republicans of the northeast who saw slavery as a s in , with the conservative republicans who thought it was bad because it hu rt white people and bloc ed progress . foner argues that lincoln was a moderate in the middle , opposing slavery primarily because it viol ated the republicanism principles of the founding fathers , especially the euality of all men and democratic self government as epressed in the declar ation of independence . on october , , in his peoria speech , lincoln declared his opposition to slavery , which he repeated en route to the presidency . speaing in his entucy a c cent , with a very powerful voice , he said the ansas act had a declared in differ ence , but as i must th in , a cover t real e al for the spread of slavery . i can not but hate it . i hate it because of the monstrous in ustice of slavery itself . i hate it because it depriv es our republican eample of its ust influence in the world ... in late , lincoln ran as a whig for the u.s. senate seat from illinois . at that time , senator s were elected by the state legislature . after leading in the first si round s of voting in the illinois assembly , his support began to dwindle , and lincoln instruct ed his bac ers to vote for ly man trumbull , who defeated opponent oel al d rich matte son . the whig s had been irrepar ably split by the ansas nebrasa act . lincoln wrote , i th in i am a whig , but others say there are no whig s , and that i am an abolition ist , even though i do no more than oppose the etension of slavery . drawing on remnants of the old whig party , and on dis enchanted free soil , liberty , and democratic party members , he was in stru mental in for g ing the shape of the new republican party . at the republican national convention , lincoln placed second in the contest to become the party s candidate for vice president . in , douglas broe with president ames buchanan , leading to a fight for control of the democratic party . some eastern republicans even favored the re election of douglas for the senate in , since he had led the opposition to the lecompton constitution , which would have admitted ansas as a slave state . in march , the supreme court issued its decision in dred scott v . s an dford chief ustice roger b. taney opined that blacs were not citiens , and derived no rights from the constitution . lincoln denounced the decision , alleg ing it was the product of a conspiracy of democrats to support the slave power . lincoln argued , the author s of the declar ation of independence never intended to say all were eual in color , sie , in tellect , moral development s , or social capacity , but they did consider all men created eual eual in certain in alien able rights , among which are life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness . after the state republican party convention nominated him for the u.s. senate in , lincoln deliver ed his house divided speech , drawing on a house divided against itself can not st and . i believe this government can not endure permanent ly half slave and half free . i do not epect the union to be dissolved i do not epect the house to fall but i do epect it will cease to be divided . it will become all one thing , or all the other . the speech created an evocat ive image of the d anger of dis union caused by the slavery debate , and rallied republicans across the north . the stage was then set for the campaign for state wide election of the illinois legislature which would , in turn , s elect lincoln or douglas as its u.s. senator . lincoln douglas debates and cooper union speech the senate campaign feature d the seven lincoln douglas debates of , the most famous political debates in american history . the principal s stood in star contrast both physical ly and political ly . lincoln warned that the slave power was threat en ing the values of republicanism , and accused douglas of dis to rt ing the values of the founding fathers that all men are created eual , while douglas emphasi ed his free port doctrine , that local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery or not , and accused lincoln of having oined the abolition ists . the debates had an atmosphere of a prie fight and drew crowd s in the thousands . lincoln stated douglas popular sovereignty theory was a threat to the nation s morality and that douglas represented a conspiracy to e tend slavery to free states . douglas said that lincoln was defy ing the authority of the u.s. supreme court and the dred scott decision . though the republican legislative candidate s won more popular votes , the democrats won more seats , and the legislature re elected douglas to the senate . despite the bitter ness of the defeat for lincoln , his articul ation of the issues gave him a national political reputation . in may , lincoln purchased the illinois staatsaneiger , a german language newspaper which was consistently support ive most of the state s , german americans voted democratic but there was republican support that a german language paper could mobilie . on february , , new yor party leaders invit ed lincoln to give a speech at cooper union to a group of powerful republicans . lincoln argued that the founding fathers had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeated ly sought to re strict slavery . lincoln in sisted the moral found ation of the republicans reuired opposition to slavery , and reected any grop ing for some middle ground between the right and the wrong . despite his in elegant appear ance many in the audience thought him a w ward and even ug ly lincoln demonstrat ed an intellectual leadership that brought him into the front rans of the party and into content ion for the republican presidential nomination . ournal ist noah broos reported , no man ever before made such an impress ion on his first appeal to a new yor audience . historian donald described the speech as a super b political move for an un announced candidate , to appear in one rival s william h . seward own state at an event sponsored by the second rival s salmon p. chase loyal ists , while not mention ing either by name during its deliver y . in response to an inuiry about his presidential intentions , lincoln said , the ta s te is in my mouth a little . presidential nomination and campaign on may , , the illinois republican state convention was held in decatur . lincoln s followers organied a campaign team led by david davis , no rman udd , leonard swett , and es se dubois , and lincoln received his first endorse ment to run for the presidency . eploit ing the embellished leg end of his frontier days with his father , lincoln s supporters adopted the label of the rail candidate . on may , at the republican national convention in chicago , lincoln s friends promised and man ipul ated and won the nomination on the third ballot , b eating candidate s such as william h . seward and salmon p. chase . a former democrat , hannibal haml in of main e , was nominated for vice president to balance the ticet . lincoln s success depend ed on his reputation as a moderate on the slavery issue , and his strong support for whig gi sh programs of internal improvements and the protect ive tariff . on the third ballot pennsylvania put him over the top . pennsylvania iron interests were reassured by his support for protect ive tariff s . lincoln s manag ers had been adroit ly focused on this deleg ation as well as the others , while following lincoln s strong dictate to mae no contract s that bi nd me . most republicans agreed with lincoln that the north was the ag grieved party , as the slave power tight en ed its gra sp on the national government with the dred scott decision and the presidency of ames buchanan . throughout the s , lincoln doubt ed the prospects of civil war , and his supporters reected claim s that his election would in cite secession . mean while , douglas was selected as the candidate of the northern democrats . delegate s from slave states waled out of the democratic convention , disagree ing with douglas position on popular sovereignty , and ultimate ly selected ohn c. brecinridge as their candidate . as douglas and the other candidate s went through with their campaign s , lincoln was the only one of them who gave no speech es . instead , he monitor ed the campaign closely and relied on the enthusiasm of the republican party . the party did the leg wor that produced maor ities across the north , and produced an abund ance of campaign post ers , leaf let s , and newspaper editorials . there were thousands of republican spea ers who focused first on the party platform , and second on lincoln s life story , emphasi ing his childhood poverty . the goal was to demonstrat e the superior power of free labor , where by a common farm boy could wor his way to the top by his own efforts . the republican party s production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition a chicago tribune write r produced a pamphlet that detailed lincoln s life , and sold , to , copies . presidency election and secession on november , , lincoln was elected the th president of the united states , b eating democrat stephen a . douglas , ohn c. brecinridge of the southern democrats , and ohn bell of the new constitutional union party . he was the first president from the republican party . winning entire ly on the strength of his support in the north and west , no ballot s were cast for him in of the southern slave states , and he won only two of counties in all the southern states . lincoln received , , votes , douglas , , votes , brecinridge , votes , and bell , votes . turn out was . percent , with lincoln winning the free northern states , as well as california and oregon . douglas won missouri , and split new ersey with lincoln . bell won virginia , tennessee , and entucy , and brecinridge won the rest of the south . although lincoln won only a plural ity of the popular vote , his victory in the electoral college was decisive lincoln had and his opponent s added together had only . there were fusi on ticet s in which all of lincoln s opponent s combined to support the same s late of elect or s in new yor , new ersey , and rhode island , but even if the anti lincoln vote had been combined in every state , lincoln still would have won a maority in the electoral college . as lincoln s election became evident , secession ists made clear their in tent to leave the union before he too office the net march . on december , , south carolina too the lead by adopting an ordin ance of secession by february , , florida , mississippi , alabama , georgia , louisiana , and teas followed . si of these states then adopted a constitution and declared themselves to be a sovereign nation , the confederate states of america . the upper south and border states del aware , maryland , virginia , north carolina , tennessee , entucy , missouri , and aransas listened to , but initially reected , the secession ist appeal . president buchanan and president elect lincoln refused to recognie the confederacy , declar ing secession illegal . the confederacy selected efferson davis as its provision al president on february , . there were attempt s at compromise . the crittenden compromise would have etended the missouri compromise line of , divid ing the territories into slave and free , contrary to the republican party s free soil platform . lincoln reected the idea , say ing , i will suffer death before i consent ... to any c once s s ion or compromise which loo s lie buy ing the privilege to tae pos session of this government to which we have a constitutional right . lincoln , however , did tacit ly support the proposed corw in amendment to the constitution , which passed congress before lincoln came into office and was then await ing ratification by the states . that proposed amendment would have protect ed slavery in states where it already eisted and would have guaranteed that congress would not interfere with slavery without southern consent . a few wees before the war , lincoln sent a letter to every governor in form ing them congress had passed a oint resolution to am end the constitution . lincoln was open to the possibility of a constitutional convention to mae further amendment s to the constitution . en route to his inaugur ation by train , lincoln address ed crowd s and legislature s across the north . the president elect then e vaded possible assassin s in baltimore , who were un covered by lincoln s head of security , all an pine rt on . on february , , he arrived in dis guise in washington , d.c. , which was placed under substantial military guard . lincoln directed his inaugural address to the south , pro claim ing once again that he had no in tent ion , or in cli nation , to abolish slavery in the southern states the president ended his address with an appeal to the people of the south we are not enemies , but friends . we must not be enemies ... the mystic chords of memory , stretch ing from every battlefield , and pat riot gra ve , to every living heart and h earth stone , all over this broad land , will yet s well the chorus of the union , when again touched , as sur ely they will be , by the better angels of our nature . the failure of the peace conference of signal ed that legislative compromise was implausible . by march , no leaders of the insurrection had proposed re oin ing the union on any terms . mean while , lincoln and nearly every republican leader agreed that the dis man tl ing of the union could not be to ler ated . beginning of the war the commander of fort sumter , south carolina , maor robert anderson , sent a reuest for provision s to washington , and the eecution of lincoln s order to meet that reuest was seen by the secession ists as an act of war . on april , , confederate forces fire d on union troops at fort sumter , forcing them to surrender , and began the war . historian all an nevins argued that the new ly inaugur ated lincoln made three miscalcul ations under estimat ing the gra v ity of the crisis , eagge rating the strength of union ist sentiment in the south , and not reali ing the southern union ists were in s ist ing there be no in va s ion . william tecumseh sherman tal ed to lincoln during inaugur ation wee and was s ad ly dis appointed at his failure to reali e that the country was sleep ing on a vol can o and that the south was prepar ing for war . donald concludes that , his repeated efforts to avoid col lis ion in the months between inaugur ation and the fir ing on ft . sumter showed he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood . but he also vowed not to surrender the fort s . the only resolution of these contradict or y position s was for the confederate s to fire the first shot they did ust that . on april , lincoln called on all the states to s end detach ments total ing , troops to re capture fort s , protect washington , and pre serve the union , which , in his view , still eisted intact despite the actions of the seced ing states . this call forced the states to choose sides . virginia declared its secession and was rewarded with the confederate capital , despite the eposed position of richmond so close to union lines . north carolina , tennessee , and aransas also voted for secession over the net two months . secession sentiment was strong in missouri and maryland , but did not prevail entucy tried to be neutral . troops headed south toward s washington to protect the capital in response to lincoln s call . on april , secession ist m obs in baltimore that controlled the rail lins attac ed union troops travel ing to the capital . george william br own , the may or of baltimore , and other suspected maryland politician s were arrested and imprisoned , without a warrant , as lincoln suspend ed the writ of habeas corpus . ohn merryman , a leader in the secession ist group in maryland , petitioned chief ustice roger b. taney to issue a writ of habeas corpus , say ing holding merryman without a hearing was un law ful . taney issued the writ , there by order ing merryman s releas e , but lincoln ignored it . then and throughout the war , lincoln came under heavy , often attac from anti war democrats , called copperheads . as sum ing command for the union in the war after the fall of fort sumter , lincoln realied the importance of taing immediate eecutive control of the war and maing an overall strategy to put down the rebellion . lincoln en counter ed an unprecedented political and military crisis , and he respond ed as commanderinchief , using unprecedented power s . he epanded his war power s , and imposed a blocade on all the confederate s hip p ing port s , dis bursed fund s before appropr iation by congress , and after suspend ing habeas corpus , arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected confederate sympathier s . lincoln was supported by congress and the northern public for these actions . in addition , lincoln had to con tend with re in forcing strong union sympathies in the border slave states and eep ing the war from be coming an international conflict . the war effort was the source of continued dis par age ment of lincoln , and dominated his time and attention . from the start , it was clear that bi partisan support would be es s ential to success in the war effort , and any manner of compromise alien ated factions on both sides of the aisle , such as the appointment of republicans and democrats to command position s in the union army . copperheads critici ed lincoln for refusing to compromise on the slavery issue . converse ly , the radical republicans critici ed him for moving too slowly in abolish ing slavery . on august , , lincoln signed the confisc ation act that author ied udici ary proceed ing s to confisc ate and free slaves who were used to support the confederate war effort . in practice the law had little effect , but it did signal political support for abolish ing slavery in the confederacy in late august , general ohn c. frmont , the republican presidential nominee , issued , without consult ing washington , a proclamation of martial law in missouri . he declared that any citien found bear ing arm s could be court martial ed and shot , and that slaves of person s aid ing the rebellion would be freed . frmont was already under a cloud with charge s of neglig ence in his command of the department of the west compound ed with alleg ations of fraud and corruption . lincoln over ruled frmont s proclamation . lincoln believed that fremont s emancipation was political neither milit arily necessary nor legal . union enl ist ments from maryland , entucy , and missouri increased by over , troops . the trent affair of late threatened war with great britain . the u.s. navy illegal ly inter cepted a british merchant s hip , the trent , on the high sea s and seied two confederate envoys britain protested ve he ment ly while the u.s. cheered . lincoln resolved the issue by releas ing the two men and war was successful ly averted with britain . lincoln s foreign policy approach had been initially hand s off , due to his in eperience he left most diplomacy appointment s and other foreign policy matter s to his secretary of state , william seward . seward s initial reaction to the trent affair , however , was too bell icose , so lincoln also turned to senator charles sumner , the chai rman of the senate foreign relations committee and an epert in british diplomacy . to l earn techn ical military terms , lincoln borrowed and studied henry hallec s boo , elements of military art and science from the library of congress . lincoln pa in s taing ly monitor ed the telegraphic reports coming into the war department in washington , d.c. . he ept close tabs on all phase s of the military effort , consult ed with governor s , and selected general s based on their pa st success as well as their state and party . in anuary , after many complaints of in ef ficiency and profit e er ing in the war department , lincoln replaced sim on came r on with ed win stanton as war secretary . stanton was one of many conservative democrats he supported brecenridge in the election who became anti slavery republicans under lincoln s leadership . in terms of war strategy , lincoln articul ated two prior ities to ensure that washington was well defended , and to conduct an aggress ive war effort that would satisf y the demand in the north for pro mpt , decisive victory maor northern newspaper editor s epect ed victory within days . twice a wee , lincoln would meet with his cabinet in the afternoon , and occasionally mary lincoln would force him to tae a car ri age rid e because she was concerned he was woring too hard . lincoln l earned from his chief of staff general henry hallec , a student of the european strateg ist omini , of the critical need to control strateg ic point s , such as the mississippi river he also new well the importance of vicsburg and understood the necessity of defeat ing the enemy s army , rather than simply capt ur ing territory . general mcclellan after the union defeat at the first battle of bull run and the retire ment of the aged win field scott in late , lincoln appointed maor general george b. mcclellan general in chief of all the union armies . mcclellan , a young west point graduate , railroad eecutive , and pennsylvania democrat , too several months to plan and attempt his peninsula campaign , long er than lincoln wanted . the campaign s obective was to capture richmond by moving the army of the potomac by boat to the peninsula and then over land to the confederate capital . mcclellan s repeated delay s frustr ated lincoln and congress , as did his position that no troops were needed to defend washington . lincoln in sisted on holding some of mcclellan s troops in defense of the capital mcclellan , who consistently over estimated the strength of confederate troops , blam ed this decision for the ultimate failure of the peninsula campaign . lincoln remov ed mcclellan as general in chief and appointed henry wage r hallec in march , after mcclellan s harrison s land ing letter , in which he offered unsoli cited political advice to lincoln urg ing caut ion in the war effort . mcclellan s letter incensed radical republicans , who successful ly pressured lincoln to app oint ohn pope , a republican , as head of the new army of virginia . pope complied with lincoln s strateg ic desire to move toward richmond from the north , thus protect ing the capital from attac . however , lac ing reuest ed reinforcements from mcclellan , now command ing the army of the potomac , pope was sound ly defeated at the second battle of bull run in the summer of , forcing the army of the potomac to defend washington for a second time . the war also epanded with naval operations in when the css virginia , former ly the us s merrimac , damage d or destroyed three union vessels in norfol , virginia , before being engaged and damage d by the us s monitor . lincoln closely review ed the dis patches and inter rog ated naval officer s during their clash in the battle of hampton roads . despite his dis satisf action with mcclellan s failure to re in force pope , lincoln was desper ate , and rest or ed him to command of all forces around washington , to the dis may of all in his cabinet but seward . two days after mcclellan s return to command , general robert e . lee s forces cross ed the potomac river into maryland , leading to the battle of anti etam in september . the ensuing union victory was among the blood i est in american history , but it enabl ed lincoln to announce that he would issue an emancipation proclamation in anuary . having composed the proclamation some time earlier , lincoln had wa it ed for a military victory to publish it to avoid it being perceived as the product of desper ation . mcclellan then resist ed the president s demand that he pursue lee s re treat ing and eposed army , while his counter part general don car los buell lie wise refused order s to move the army of the ohio against rebel forces in eastern tennessee . as a result , lincoln replaced buell with william rosecrans and , after the mid term elections , he replaced mcclellan with republican ambrose burnside . both of these replace ments were political moderate s and pro spect ive ly more support ive of the commanderinchief . burnside , against the advice of the president , premature ly launched an of fensive across the rappahannoc river and was stu nn ing ly defeated by lee at fredericsburg in december . not only had burnside been defeated on the battlefield , but his soldiers were dis grunt led and undisciplined . desert ion s during were in the thousands and they increased after fredericsburg . lincoln brought in oseph hooer , despite his record of loo se tal about the need for a military dictatorship . the mid term elections in brought the republicans severe losses due to sharp dis favor with the administration over its failure to deliver a speedy end to the war , as well as ris ing in fl ation , new high taes , rumors of corruption , the suspens ion of habeas corpus , the military draft law , and fear s that freed slaves would under min e the labor maret . the emancipation proclamation announced in september gained votes for the republicans in the rural areas of new england and the upper midwest , but it lost votes in the cities and the lower midwest . while republicans were disc our aged , democrats were energied and did especially well in pennsylvania , ohio , indian a , and new yor . the republicans did maintain their maor ities in congress and in the maor states , ecept new yor . the cincinnati gaette con tend ed that the voters were d epressed by the in term in able nature of this war , as so far conducted , and by the rapid ehaust ion of the national re sources without progress . in the spring of , lincoln was optimistic about up coming military campaign s to the point of thining the end of the war could be near if a s tr ing of victories could be put together these plans included hooer s attac on lee north of richmond , rosecrans on chattanooga , grant s on vicsburg , and a naval assault on charles ton . hooer was route d by lee at the battle of chancellors ville in may , but continued to command his troops for some wees . he ignored lincoln s order to divid e his troops , and possibly force lee to do the same in har per s fer ry , and tend er ed his resig nation , which lincoln accept ed . he was replaced by george meade , who followed lee into pennsylvania for the gettysburg campaign , which was a victory for the union , though lee s army avoid ed capture . at the same time , after initial set bac s , grant l aid siege to vicsburg and the union navy attain ed some success in charles ton harbor . after the battle of gettysburg , lincoln clear ly understood that his military decision s would be more effective ly carried out by con ve y ing his order s through his war secretary or his general in chief on to his general s , who resented his civil ian interfere nce with their own plans . even so , he often continued to give detailed direction s to his general s as commanderinchief . emancipation proclamation lincoln understood that the federal government s power to end slavery was limited by the constitution , which before , committed the issue to individual states . he argued before and during his election that the eventual etinct ion of slavery would result from prevent ing its epansion into new u.s. territory . at the beginning of the war , he also sought to per suade the states to accept compens ated emancipation in return for their pro hibit ion of slavery . lincoln believed that curtail ing slavery in these way s would economic ally epunge it , as envisioned by the founding fathers , under the constitution . president lincoln reected two geographic ally limited emancipation attempt s by maor general ohn c. frmont in august and by maor general david hunt er in may , on the ground s that it was not within their power , and it would up set the border states loyal to the union . on une , , endorse d by lincoln , congress passed an act ban n ing slavery on all federal territory . in uly , the second confisc ation act was passed , which set up court pro cedures that could free the slaves of any one convicted of aid ing the rebellion . although lincoln believed it was not within congress s power to free the slaves within the states , he approved the bill in def er ence to the legislature . he felt such action could only be taen by the commanderinchief using war power s grant ed to the president by the constitution , and lincoln was planning to tae that action . in that mon th , lincoln disc us s ed a draft of the emancipation proclamation with his cabinet . in it , he stated that as a fit and necessary military measure , on anuary , , all person s held as slaves in the confederate states will the nce for ward , and for ever , be free . private ly , lincoln concluded at this point that the slave base of the confederacy had to be eliminate d . however copperheads argued that emancipation was a stumbl ing bloc to peace and reunific ation . republican editor ho race gree ley of the highly influential new yor tribune fell for the p loy , and lincoln refut ed it directly in a shrewd letter of august , . the president said the primary goal of his actions as president he used the first person pro no un and eplicit ly refers to his official duty was pre serving the union the emancipation proclamation , issued on september , , and put into effect on anuary , , declared free the slaves in states not then under union control , with eemptions specified for areas already under union control in two states . lincoln spent the net days prepar ing the army and the nation for emancipation , while democrats rallied their voters in the off year elections by war n ing of the threat freed slaves pos ed to northern whites . once the abolition of slavery in the rebel states became a military obective , as union armies advanced south , more slaves were liberate d until all three million of them in confederate territory were freed . lincoln s comment on the sign ing of the proclamation was i never , in my life , felt more certain that i was do ing right , than i do in sign ing this paper . for some time , lincoln continued earlier plans to set up colonies for the new ly freed slaves . he comment ed favor ably on colon iation in the emancipation proclamation , but all attempt s at such a massive under taing failed . a few days after emancipation was announced , republican governor s met at the war governor s conference they supported the president s proclamation , but suggested the removal of general george b. mcclellan as commander of the union army . using former slaves in the military was official government policy after the issu ance of the emancipation proclamation . by the spring of , he was read y to recruit blac troops in more than to en number s . in a letter to andrew ohnson , the military governor of tennessee , encouraging him to lead the way in rais ing blac troops , lincoln wrote , the b are sight of , armed and dr illed blac soldiers on the bans of the mississippi would end the rebellion at once . by the end of , at lincoln s direction , general loreno thomas had recruit ed regi ments of blacs from the mississippi valley . frederic douglas s once observ ed of lincoln in his company , i was never reminded of my humble origin , or of my un popular color . gettysburg address with the great union victory at the battle of gettysburg in uly , and the defeat of the copperheads in the ohio election in the fall , lincoln maintain ed a strong base of party support and was in a strong position to re define the war effort , despite the new yor city draft riot s . the stage was set for his address at the gettysburg battlefield cemetery . defy ing lincoln s predict ion that the world will little note , nor long re member what we say here , the address became the most uoted speech in american history . the gettysburg address was deliver ed at the dedication of the soldiers national cemetery in gettysburg , pennsylvania , on the afternoon of thursday , november , . in words , and three minutes , lincoln asserted the nation was born not in , but in , conceived in liberty , and dedicated to the pro position that all men are created eual . he defined the war as an effort dedicated to these principles of liberty and euality for all . the emancipation of slaves was now part of the national war effort . he declared that the deaths of so many brave soldiers would not be in va in , that slavery would end as a result of the losses , and the future of democracy would be assured , that government of the people , by the people , for the people , sh all not perish from the earth . lincoln concluded that the civil war had a profound obective a new birth of freedom in the nation . general grant meade s failure to capture lee s army as it re treated from gettysburg , and the continued pass iv ity of the army of the potomac , persuaded lincoln that a change in command was needed . general ulysses s . grant s victories at the battle of shiloh and in the vicsburg campaign impress ed lincoln and made grant a strong candidate to head the union army . respond ing to critic ism of grant after shiloh , lincoln had said , i c a nt spare this man . he fight s . with grant in command , lincoln felt the union army could relent less ly pursue a series of coordinated offensives in multiple theater s , and have a top commander who agreed on the use of blac troops . nevertheless , lincoln was concerned that grant might be consider ing a can did acy for president in , as mcclellan was . lincoln ar range d for an inter media ry to mae inuiry into grant s political intentions , and being assured that he had none , sub mitted to the senate grant s pro motion to commander of the union army . he obtain ed congress s consent to re in state for grant the ran of lieutenant general , which no officer had held since george washington . grant wage d his blood y over land campaign in . this is often characterie d as a war of attrit ion , given high union losses at battle s such as the battle of the wild er ness and cold harbor . even though they had the advantage of fight ing on the de fensive , the confederate forces had almost as high a percent age of casualties as the union forces . the high casualty figure s of the union al armed the north grant had lost a third of his army , and lincoln ased what grant s plans were , to which the general replied , i propos e to fight it out on this line if it taes all summer . the confederacy lac ed reinforcements , so lee s army sh ran with every cost ly battle . grant s army moved south , cross ed the ames river , forcing a siege and trench war f are outside petersburg , virginia . lincoln then made an etended visit to grant s headuarters at city point , virginia . this allow ed the president to con fer in person with grant and william tecumseh sherman about the hostil ities , as sherman co incident ally manag ed a has ty visit to grant from his position in north carolina . lincoln and the republican party mobilie d support for the draft throughout the north , and replaced his losses . lincoln author ied grant to target the confederate infra structure such as plant ations , railroad s , and bridge s hop ing to des troy the south s moral e and weaen its economic ability to continue fight ing . grant s move to petersburg resulted in the ob struction of three railroad s between richmond and the south . this strategy allow ed general s sherman and philip sheridan to des troy plant ations and town s in virginia s shenandoah valley . the damage caused by sherman s march to the sea through georgia in was limited to a swath , but neither lincoln nor his commander s saw destruction as the main goal , but rather defeat of the confederate armies . as ne ely concludes , there was no effort to engage in total war against civil ian s , as in world war ii . confederate general ubal anderson early began a series of assault s in the north that threatened the capital . during early s raid on washington , d.c. in , lincoln was wat ch ing the combat from an eposed position captain oliver wendell holmes shouted at him , get down , you damn foo l , before you get shot after repeated call s on grant to defend washington , sheridan was appointed and the threat from early was dis patched . as grant continued to wea r down lee s forces , efforts to disc us s peace began . confederate vice president stephen s led a group to meet with lincoln , seward , and others at hampton roads . lincoln refused to allow any ne got iation with the confederacy as a co eual his sole obective was an a gree ment to end the fight ing and the meet ing s produced no results . on april , , grant successful ly out flaned lee s forces in the battle of five for s and nearly encirc led petersburg , and the confederate government evacu ated richmond . days later , when that city fell , lincoln visited the vanui shed confederate capital as he waled through the city , white southern ers were stone face d , but freedmen greeted him as a hero . on april , lee surrender ed to grant at appomat to and the war was effective ly over . re election lincoln was a master politician , bring ing together and holding together all the main factions of the republican party , and bring ing in war democrats such as ed win m . stanton and andrew ohnson as well . lincoln spent many hours a wee tal ing to politician s from across the land and using his patronage power s great ly epanded over peace time to hold the factions of his party together , build support for his own policies , and f end off efforts by radical s to drop him from the ticet . at its convention , the republican party selected andrew ohnson , a war democrat from the southern state of tennessee , as his running m ate . to broad en his coalition to include war democrats as well as republicans , lincoln ran under the label of the new union party . when grant s spring campaign s turned into blood y stalemates and union casualties mount ed , the lac of military success wor e heavily on the president s re election prospects , and many republicans across the country fear ed that lincoln would be defeated . sharing this fear , lincoln wrote and signed a pledge that , if he should lose the election , he would still defeat the confederacy before turn ing over the white house lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet , but ased them to sign the sea led envelope . while the democratic platform followed the peace wing of the party and called the war a failure , their candidate , general george b. mcclellan , supported the war and repudi ated the platform . lincoln provided grant with more troops and mobilie d his party to re new its support of grant in the war effort . sherman s capture of atlanta in september and david far ragut s capture of mobile ended defeat ist itters the democratic party was deeply split , with some leaders and most soldiers open ly for lincoln . by contrast , the national union party was united and energied as lincoln made emancipation the central issue , and state republican parties stress ed the per fidy of the copperheads . lincoln was re elected in a land slide , carry ing all but three states , and receiv ing percent of the union soldiers vote . on march , , lincoln deliver ed his second inaugural address . in it , he deemed the high casualties on both sides to be god s will . historian mar no ll concludes it rans among the small hand ful of semi s a cred tet s by which americans c once ive their place in the world . lincoln said reconstruction reconstruction began during the war , as lincoln and his associate s ant icipat ed uestion s of how to re in teg rate the conuered southern states , and how to determi ne the fate s of confederate leaders and freed slaves . short ly after lee s surrender , a general had ased lincoln how the defeated confederate s should be treated , and lincoln replied , let em up easy . in eep ing with that sentiment , lincoln led the moderate s regard ing reconstruction policy , and was opposed by the radical republicans , under rep . thaddeus stevens , sen. charles sumner and sen. benamin wade , political all ies of the president on other issues . determined to find a course that would reunite the nation and not alien ate the south , lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held throughout the war . his amnesty proclamation of december , , offered pardons to those who had not held a confederate civil office , had not mis treated union prisoners , and would sign an oath of alleg i ance . as southern states were sub due d , critical decision s had to be made as to their leadership while their administration s were reform ed . of special importance were tennessee and aransas , where lincoln appointed general s andrew ohnson and frederic steel e as military governor s , respect ive ly . in louisiana , lincoln order ed general nathaniel p. bans to pro mote a plan that would rest or e state hood when percent of the voters agreed to it . lincoln s democratic opponent s seied on these appointment s to acc use him of using the military to ensure his and the republicans political a spir ations . on the other hand , the radical s denounced his policy as too len ient , and passed their own plan , the wade davis bill , in . when lincoln vetoed the bill , the radical s retali ated by refusing to seat representatives elected from louisiana , aransas , and tennessee . lincoln s appointment s were designed to eep both the moderate and radical factions in har ness . to fill chief ustice taney s seat on the supreme court , he named the choice of the radical s , salmon p. chase , who lincoln believed would up hold the emancipation and paper money policies . after imp le ment ing the emancipation proclamation , which did not apply to every state , lincoln increased pres s ure on congress to outlaw slavery throughout the entire nation with a constitutional amendment . lincoln declared that such an amendment would cli nch the who le matter . by december a proposed constitutional amendment that would outlaw slavery absolute ly was brought to congress for passage . this first attempt at an amendment failed to pass , fall ing short of the reuired twothirds maority on une , , in the house of representatives . passage of the proposed amendment became part of the republican union ist platform in the election of . after a long debate in the house , a second attempt passed congress on anuary , , and was sent to the state legislature s for ratification . upon ratification , it became the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution on december , . as the war drew to a close , lincoln s presidential reconstruction for the south was in flu having believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the million s of freedmen . he signed into law senator charles sumner s freed man s bureau bill that set up a temporary federal age ncy designed to meet the immediate material needs of former slaves . the law as signed land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen . lincoln stated that his louisiana plan did not apply to all states under reconstruction . short ly before his assassin ation , lincoln announced he had a new plan for southern reconstruction . discussion s with his cabinet revea led lincoln planned short term military control over southern states , until re admission under the control of southern union ists . re defining the republic and republicanism the successful reunific ation of the states had conseuences for the name of the country . the term the united states has historical ly been used , sometimes in the plural these united states , and other times in the singular , without any particular grammat ical con sistency . the civil war was a significant force in the eventual domin ance of the singular us age by the end of the th century . in recent years , historian s such as har ry affa , he rman be l , ohn diggins , vernon burton and eric foner have stress ed lincoln s re definit ion of republican values . as early as the s , a time when most political rhetoric focused on the sanct ity of the constitution , lincoln re directed emphasi s to the declar ation of independence as the found ation of american political values what he called the she et anchor of republicanism . the declar ation s emphasi s on freedom and euality for all , in contrast to the constitution s tolerance of slavery , shifted the debate . as diggins concludes regard ing the highly influential cooper union speech of early , lincoln present ed americans a theory of history that offer s a profound contribution to the theory and des tiny of republicanism itself . his position gained strength because he high light ed the moral basis of republicanism , rather than its legalisms . nevertheless , in , lincoln ust ified the war in terms of legalisms the constitution was a contract , and for one party to get out of a contract all the other parties had to a gree , and then in terms of the national duty to guarantee a republican form of government in every state . burton argues that lincoln s republicanism was taen up by the freedmen as they were emancip ated . in march , in his first inaugural address , lincoln eplore d the nature of democracy . he denounced secession as anarchy , and eplain ed that maority rule had to be balance d by constitutional restraint s in the american system . he said a maority held in restraint by constitutional checs and limit ations , and always c hanging easi ly with de liberate changes of popular opinions and sentiment s , is the only true sovereign of a free people . other enactment s lincoln adhered to the whig theory of the presidency , which gave congress primary responsibility for writing the laws while the eecutive en forced them . lincoln only vetoed four bill s passed by congress the only important one was the wade davis bill with its harsh program of reconstruction . he signed the homestead act in , maing million s of a cre s of government held land in the west available for purchase at very low cost . the morrill land grant colleges act , also signed in , provided government grant s for agricultural colleges in each state . the pacific railway acts of and grant ed federal support for the construction of the united states first trans continental railroad , which was completed in . the passage of the homestead act and the pacific railway acts was made possible by the absence of southern congress men and senator s who had opposed the measures in the s . other important legislation involved two measures to raise revenue s for the federal government tariff s a policy with long precedent , and a new federal income ta . in , lincoln signed the second and third morrill tariff , the first having become law under ames buchanan . also in , lincoln signed the revenue act of , creating the first u.s. income ta . this created a fl at ta of percent on income s above in current dollar terms , which was later changed by the revenue act of to a progress ive rate structure . lincoln also preside d over the epansion of the federal government s economic influence in several other areas . the cre ation of the system of national bans by the national ban ing act provided a strong financial networ in the country . it also established a national currency . in , congress created , with lincoln s approval , the department of agriculture . in , lincoln sent a senior general , ohn pope , to put down the siou uprising in minnesota . present ed with eecution warrant s for convicted santee daota who were accused of illing in no cent farmers , lincoln conducted his own personal review of each of these warrant s , eventual ly approv ing for eecution one was later reprieved . president lincoln had planned to reform federal indian policy . in the wa e of grant s casualties in his campaign against lee , lincoln had considered yet another eecutive call for a military draft , but it was never issued . in response to rumors of one , however , the editor s of the new yor world and the ournal of commerce published a false draft proclamation which created an opportunity for the editor s and others employ ed at the public ations to corner the gold maret . lincoln s reaction was to s end the strong est of messages to the media about such behavior he order ed the military to seie the two paper s . the seiure last ed for two days . lincoln is largely responsible for the institution of the than s giving holiday in the united states . before lincoln s presidency , than s giving , while a regional holiday in new england since the th century , had been pro claimed by the federal government only spo radical ly and on irregular date s . the last such proclamation had been during ames madison s presidency years before . in , lincoln declared the final thursday in november of that year to be a day of than s giving . in une , lincoln approved the yosemite grant enacted by congress , which provided unprecedented federal protect ion for the area now nown as yosemite national par . udicial appointment s supreme court appointment s lincoln s declared philosophy on court nomination s was that we can not as a man what he will do , and if we should , and he should answer us , we should despise him for it . therefore we must tae a man whose opinions are nown . lincoln made five appointment s to the united states supreme court . noah haynes swayne , nominated anuary , and appointed anuary , , was chosen as an anti slavery lawyer who was committed to the union . samuel free man mil ler , nominated and appointed on uly , , supported lincoln in the election and was an a vowed abolition ist . david davis , lincoln s campaign manag er in , nominated december , and appointed december , , had also served as a udge in lincoln s illinois court circuit . stephen ohnson field , a previous california supreme court ustice , was nominated march , and appointed march , , and provided geographic balance , as well as political balance to the court as a democrat . finally , lincoln s treasury secretary , salmon p. chase , was nominated as chief ustice , and appointed the same day , on december , . lincoln believed chase was an able ur ist , would support reconstruction legislation , and that his appointment united the republican party . other udicial appointment s lincoln appointed federal udge s , including four associate ustice s and one chief ustice to the supreme court of the united states , and udge s to the united states district court s . lincoln appointed no udge s to the united states circuit court s during his time in office . states admitted to the union west virginia , admitted to the union une , , contained the former north western most counties of virginia that seced ed from virginia after that common wealth declared its secession from the union . as a condition for its admission , west virginia s constitution was reuired to provide for the gradu al abolition of slavery . nevada , which became the third state in the far west of the continent , was admitted as a free state on october , . assassin ation ohn wiles booth was a well nown act or and a confederate spy from maryland though he never oined the confederate army , he had contact s with the confederate secret service . in , booth formulate d a plan very similar to one of thomas n . con rad previous ly author ied by the confederacy to idnap lincoln in e change for the releas e of confederate prisoners . after attend ing an april , , speech in which lincoln promoted voting rights for blacs , an incensed booth changed his plans and became determined to assassin ate the president . learning that the president , first lady , and head union general ulysses s . grant would be attend ing for d s theatre , booth formulate d a plan with coconspirators to assassin ate vice president andrew ohnson , secretary of state william h . seward and general grant . without his main body guard , ward hill la mon , lincoln left to attend the play our american cousin on april . grant along with his wife chose at the last minute to travel to philadelphia instead of attend ing the play . lincoln s body guard , ohn par er , left for d s theater during inter mis s ion to oin lincoln s coach man for dr in s in the star saloon net do or . the now un guard ed president s at in his state bo in the balcony . se iing the opportunity , booth crept up from behind and at about pm , aimed at the bac of lincoln s head and fire d at point blan range , mortal ly wound ing the president . maor henry rathb one moment arily gr app led with booth , but booth stabb ed him and escape d . after being on the run for days , booth was traced down and found on a farm in virginia , some south of washington , d.c. . after a brief fight with union troops , booth was illed by sergeant boston corbett on april . an army surge on , doctor charles le ale , was sitting near by at the theater and immediate ly as sisted the president . he found the president unrespons ive , barely brea thing and with no detect able pulse . having determined that the president had been shot in the head , and not stabb ed in the should er as original ly thought , he made an attempt to clear the blood clot , after which the president began to brea the more natural ly . the dying man was taen across the street to petersen house . after being in a com a for nine hours , lincoln died at am on april . pres by ter ian minister phineas den s more gurley , then present , was ased to offer a prayer , after which secretary of war stanton saluted and said , now he be long s to the age s . lincoln s flag enfolded body was then escorted in the rain to the white house by b are headed union officer s , while the city s church bell s ran g . president ohnson was sworn in at am , less than hours after lincoln s death . the late president lay in state in the east room , and then in the capitol rotunda from april through april . for his final ourney with his son willie , both case ts were transport ed in the eecutive coach united states and for three wees the lincoln special funeral train decor ated in blac bunt ing bore lincoln s remains on a s low circuit ous way point ourney from washington d.c. to springfield , illinois stopping at many cities across the north for large scale memorial s attend ed by hundreds of thousands , as well as many people who gather ed in in formal t rac side tributes with band s , b on fire s and hymn s ing ing or silent reverence with h at in hand as the railway process ion slowly passed by . religious and philosophical beliefs as a young man , lincoln was clear ly a religious s ept ic , or , in the words of a bi ographer , even an iconoc last . later in life , lincoln s freuent use of religious image ry and language might have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to appeal to his audience s , who were mostly evangelical protestant s . he never oined a church , although he freuently attend ed with his wife , but he was deeply familiar with the bible , uoted it and p raised it . in the s lincoln sub s cribed to the doctrine of necessity , a belief that asserted the human mind was controlled by some higher power . in the s , lincoln acnowledged provide nce in a general way , and rare ly used the language or image ry of the evangelical s he regarded the republicanism of the founding fathers with an almost religious reverence . when he suffered the death of his son ed ward , lincoln more freuently acnowledged his own need to depend on god . the death of his son willie in february may have caused lincoln to loo toward religion for answer s and sol ace . after willie s death , lincoln considered why , from a divine st and point , the severity of the war was necessary . he wrote at this time that god could have either saved or destroyed the union without a human contest . yet the contest began . and having be gun he could give the final victory to either side any day . yet the contest proceed s . on the day lincoln was assassin ated , he reported ly told his wife mary at for d s theatre he desired to visit the holy land . historical reputation in survey s of scholars ran ing president s since the s , lincoln is consistently raned in the top three , often . a study found that scholars in the field s of history and politics raned lincoln number one , while legal scholars placed him second after washington . of all the presidential ran ing poll s conducted since , lincoln has been rate d at the very top in the maority of poll s schlesinger , schlesinger , murray b less ing survey , chicago tribune poll , schlesinger , cspan , ridingsmciver , time , and cspan . generally , the top three president s are rate d as lincoln george washington and franlin d . roosevelt , although lincoln and washington , and washington and roosevelt , occasionally are reversed . president lincoln s assassin ation made him a national mar ty r and endowed him with a re cognition of myth ic proportion . lincoln was viewed by abolition ists as a champ ion for human liberty . republicans lined lincoln s name to their party . many , though not all , in the south considered lincoln as a man of out st and ing ability . schwart argues that lincoln s reputation grew slowly in the late th century until the progress ive era s when he emerged as one of the most venerated heroes in american history , with even white southern ers in a gree ment . the high point came in with the dedication of the lincoln memorial on the m all in washington . in the new deal era liberal s honor ed lincoln not so much as the self made man or the great war president , but as the advocate of the common man who doubt less would have supported the welf are state . in the cold war years , lincoln s image shifted to emphasie the symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by communist regime s . by the s lincoln had become a hero to political conservative s for his intense national ism , support for business , his insistence on stopping the spread of human bond age , his act ing in terms of l ocean and bure an principles on be half of both liberty and tradition , and his devot ion to the principles of the founding fathers . as a whig activ ist , lincoln was a spoe s man for business interests , favor ing high tariff s , bans , internal improvements , and railroad s in opposition to the agrarian democrats . william c. har ris found that lincoln s reverence for the founding fathers , the constitution , the laws under it , and the preservat ion of the republic and its institution s under girded and strength en ed his con serv at ism . . ames g . randall emphasie s his tolerance and especially his mode r ation in his prefer ence for order ly progress , his dis trust of d anger ous agitat ion , and his reluct ance toward ill digested sche mes of reform . randall concludes that , he was conservative in his comple te avoid ance of that type of so called radical ism which involved abuse of the south , hatred for the slave hold er , thirst for venge ance , partisan plott ing , and un generous demand s that southern institution s be trans formed over night by outside rs . by the late s , liberal s , such as historian ler one bennett , were having second thought s , especially regard ing lincoln s view s on racial issues . bennett won wide attention when he called lincoln a white supremac ist in . he noted that lincoln used ethnic slurs , told oe s that ridicu led blacs , in sisted he opposed social euality , and proposed s end ing freed slaves to another country . defend ers , such as author s dirc and cash in , retorted that he was not as bad as most politician s and that he was a moral vision ary who def t ly advanced the abolition ist cause , as fast as political ly possible . the emphasi s shifted away from lincoln the emancip at or to an argument that blacs had freed themselves from slavery , or at least were responsible for pres sur ing the government on emancipation . historian barry schwart wrote in that lincoln s image suffered ero s ion , fading prestige , be nign ridicu le , in the late th century . on the other hand , donald opined in his b iography that lincoln was distinct ly endowed with the personal ity trait of negative cap ability , defined by the poet ohn eat s and attribut ed to etra ordin ary leaders who were content in the mid st of un certain t ies and doubt s , and not com pel led toward fact or reason . memorial s lincoln appears on the penny and the bill , and on many post age stamps . he has been memorial ied in many town , city , and county names , including the capital of nebrasa . the most famous and most visited memorial s are the lincoln memorial in washington , d.c. lincoln s sculpture on mount rush more for d s theatre and petersen house where he died in washington and the abraham lincoln presidential library and museum , located in springfield , illinois , not far from lincoln s home and his tomb . barry schwart , a socio log ist who has eamin ed america s cultural memory , argues that in the s and s , the memory of abraham lincoln was practical ly s a cred and provided the nation with a moral symbol in spir ing and guiding american life . during the great depression , he argues , lincoln served as a means for seeing the world s dis appointment s , for maing its suffer ing s not so much eplic able as meaning ful . franlin d . roosevelt , prepar ing america for war , used the words of the civil war president to cl ar ify the threat pos ed by germany and apan . americans ased , what would lincoln do however , he also find s that since world war ii , lincoln s symbol ic power has lost relevance , and this fading hero is symptom at ic of fading confidence in national great ness . he suggested that postmodernism and multi cultural ism have diluted great ness as a concept . see also references bibl iography cited in footnotes addition al references eternal lins aristotle , aristotls bc bc was a gree philosopher and polymath , a student of plato and teacher of aleander the great . his writings cover many subect s , including physics , metaphysics , poetry , theater , music , logic , rhetoric , linguistics , politics , government , ethics , biology , and oology . together with plato and socrates plato s teacher , aristotle is one of the most important founding figure s in western philosophy . aristotle s writings were the first to create a comprehens ive system of western philosophy , en compass ing morality , aesthetics , logic , science , politics , and metaphysics . aristotle s view s on the physical sciences profound ly shape d medieval scholars hip , and their influence etended well into the renaissance , although they were ultimate ly replaced by new ton ian physics . in the o ological sciences , some of his observation s were confirmed to be accurate only in the th century . his wors con ta in the earliest nown formal study of logic , which was incorporated in the late th century into modern formal logic . in metaphysics , aristotelian ism had a profound influence on philosophical and the ological thining in the islam ic and ewish traditions in the middle age s , and it continues to influence christian the ology , especially the scholastic tradition of the catholic church . aristotle was well nown among medieval muslim intellectual s and revered as the first teacher . his ethics , though always influential , gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics . all aspects of aristotle s philosophy continue to be the obect of active academic study today . though aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogue s cicero described his literary style as a river of gold , it is thought that the maority of his writings are now lost and only about onethird of the original wors have survived . life aristotle , whose name means the best purpose , was born in stagira , chalcidice , in bc , about east of modern day the ssalonii . his father nicomachus was the personal physic ian to ing amyntas of macedon . although there is little information on aristotle childhood , he probably did spend some time then in the macedonian palace , maing his first connections with the macedonian monarch y . at about the age of eight een , he went to athens to continue his education at plato s academy . aristotle remained at the academy for nearly twenty years before leav ing athens in bc . the tradition al story about his departure reports that he was dis appointed with the direction the academy too after control passed to plato s nephew speusippus upon his death , although it is possible that he fear ed anti macedonian sentiment s and left before plato had died . he then travel ed with eno c rates to the court of his fr i end hermias of atarneus in asia minor . while in asia , aristotle travel ed with the ophrastus to the island of lesbos , where together they research ed the botany and oology of the island . aristotle married hermias s ad opt ive daughter or niece pythia s . she bore him a daughter , whom they named pythia s . soon after hermias death , aristotle was invit ed by philip ii of macedon to become the tutor to his son aleander in bc . aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of macedon . during that time he gave less on s not only to aleander , but also to two other future ing s ptolemy and cassander . aristotle encouraged aleander toward eastern conuest , and his attitude toward s per s ia was un aba shed ly ethnocentric . in one famous eample , he counsel s aleander to be a leader to the grees and a de spot to the barbarians , to loo after the former as after friends and relative s , and to deal with the latter as with be as ts or plant s . by bc he had returned to athens , establ is h ing his own school there nown as the lyceum . aristotle conducted course s at the school for the net twelve years . while in athens , his wife pythia s died and aristotle became involved with her pyllis of stagira , who bore him a son whom he named after his father , nicomachus . according to the s uda , he also had an eromenos , palaephatus of abydus . it is during this period in athens from to bc when aristotle is believed to have composed many of his wors . aristotle wrote many dialogue s , only fragment s of which survived . the wors that have survived are in treat is e form and were not , for the most part , intended for widespread public ation , as they are generally thought to be lecture aid s for his student s . his most important treatises include physics , metaphysics , nicomachean ethics , politics , de anima on the soul and poet ics . aristotle not only studied almost every subect possible at the time , but made significant contribution s to most of them . in physical science , aristotle studied anatomy , astronomy , embry ology , geography , geology , meteor ology , physics and oology . in philosophy , he wrote on aesthetics , ethics , government , metaphysics , politics , economic s , psych ology , rhetoric and the ology . he also studied education , foreign custom s , literature and poetry . his combined wors constitute a virtual encyclopedia of gree nowledge . it has been suggested that aristotle was probably the last person to now every thing there was to be nown in his own time . near the end of aleander s life , aleander began to su spect p lots against himself , and threatened aristotle in letter s . aristotle had made no secret of his contempt for aleander s pre ten se of d iv in ity , and the ing had eecuted aristotle s gr and nephew call ist henes as a trait or . a widespread tradition in antiuity suspected aristotle of play ing a role in aleander s death , but there is little evidence for this . upon aleander s death , anti macedonian sentiment in athens once again flared . eurymedon the hierophant denounced aristotle for not holding the god s in honor . aristotle fled the city to his mother s family e state in chalcis , eplain ing , i will not allow the athenians to s in twice against philosophy , a reference to athens s prior trial and eecution of socrates . he died in euboea of natural causes within the year in bc . aristotle named chief eecutor his student anti pat er and left a will in which he ased to be buried net to his wife . thought logic with the prior analytics , aristotle is credit ed with the earliest study of formal logic , and his conception of it was the domin ant form of western logic until th century advances in mathematical logic . ant stated in the critiue of p ure reason that aristotle s theory of logic completely account ed for the core of deductive in fer ence . history aristotle says that on the subect of reason ing he had no thing else on an earlier date to spea of . however , plato reports that synta was devised before him , by pro dicus of ceos , who was concerned by the correct use of words . logic seems to have emerged from dialectic s the earlier philosopher s made freuent use of concept s lie reduct io ad absurdum in their discussion s , but never tr uly understood the logical implic ations . even plato had difficulties with logic although he had a reason able conception of a deductive system , he could never actually con struc t one and relied instead on his dialectic . plato believed that deduct ion would simply follow from premise s , hence he focused on maintain ing solid premise s so that the conclusion would logical ly follow . conseuently , plato realied that a method for obtain ing conclusion s would be most be neficial . he never succeeded in devis ing such a method , but his best attempt was published in his boo sophist , where he introduced his divis ion method . analytics and the organ on what we today call aristotelian logic , aristotle himself would have label ed analytics . the term logic he re served to mean dialectic s . most of aristotle s wor is probably not in its original form , since it was most liely edited by student s and later lecture rs . the logical wors of aristotle were compiled into si boos in about the early st century ad the order of the boos or the teaching s from which they are composed is not certain , but this l ist was derived from analysis of aristotle s writings . it goes from the basic s , the analysis of simple terms in the categories , the analysis of pro position s and their elementary relations in on inter pret ation , to the study of more comple forms , name ly , syllogisms in the analytics and dialectic s in the topics and sophist ical refut ations . the first three treatises form the core of the logical theory strict o sens u the gra m mar of the language of logic and the correct rule s of reason ing . there is one volume of aristotle s concern ing logic not found in the organ on , name ly the four th boo of metaphysics . aristotle s scientific method lie his teacher plato , aristotle s philosophy aims at the universal . aristotle , however , find s the universal in particular things , which he call s the essence of things , while plato find s that the universal eist s a part from particular things , and is related to them as their pro to type or eemplar . for aristotle , therefore , philosophic method imp lie s the as cent from the study of particular phenomena to the nowledge of essence s , while for plato philosophic method means the descent from a nowledge of universal forms or ideas to a con templ ation of particular imitation s of these . for aristotle , form still refers to the unconditional basis of phenomena but is instant i ated in a particular substance see universal s and particular s , below . in a certain sense , aristotle s method is both in duct ive and deductive , while plato s is essentially deductive from a prior i principles . in aristotle s terminology , natural philosophy is a branch of philosophy eamin ing the phenomena of the natural world , and include s field s that would be regarded today as physics , biology and other natural sciences . in modern times , the scope of philosophy has become limited to more generic or abstr act in uiries , such as ethics and metaphysics , in which logic play s a maor role . today s philosophy tends to eclude empi rical study of the natural world by means of the scientific method . in contrast , aristotle s philosophical end eavors encom passed virtual ly all face ts of intellectual inuiry . in the large r sense of the word , aristotle mae s philosophy co etensive with reason ing , which he also would describe as science . note , however , that his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that covered by the term scientific method . for aristotle , all science dianoia is either practical , poetical or theoretical metaphysics b . by practical science , he means ethics and politics by poetical science , he means the study of poetry and the other fine art s by theoretical science , he means physics , mathematics and metaphysics . if logic or analytics is regarded as a study preliminary to philosophy , the divis ion s of aristotelian philosophy would con s ist of logic theoretical philosophy , including metaphysics , physics and mathematics practical philosophy and poetical philosophy . in the period between his two stays in athens , between his times at the academy and the lyceum , aristotle conducted most of the scientific thining and research for which he is renowned today . in fact , most of aristotle s life was devot ed to the study of the obects of natural science . aristotle s metaphysics contains observation s on the nature of number s but he made no original contribution s to mathematics . he did , however , perform original research in the natural sciences , e.g. , botany , oology , physics , astronomy , chemistry , meteor ology , and several other sciences . aristotle s writings on science are largely ualitative , as opposed to uantitative . beginning in the th century , s cient ists began apply ing mathematics to the physical sciences , and aristotle s wor in this area was deemed hope less ly in adeuate . his fail ing s were largely due to the absence of concept s lie mass , ve loc ity , force and temperature . he had a conception of speed and temperature , but no uantitative understanding of them , which was part ly due to the absence of basic eperimental device s , lie clocs and the rmometers . his writings provide an account of many scientific observation s , a mit ure of precocious accuracy and c urious errors . for eample , in his history of animals he claimed that human male s have more teeth than female s . in a similar ve in , ohn philoponus , and later galileo , showed by simple eperiments that aristotle s theory that a heavier obect fall s faster than a light er obect is in correct . on the other hand , aristotle refut ed democritus s claim that the mil y way was made up of those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun s ray s , point ing out correct ly , even if such reason ing was bound to be dis missed for a long time that , given current astronomical demonstrat ion s that the sie of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun , then ... the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screen s none of them . in places , aristotle goes too far in deriv ing laws of the universe from simple observation and over stretch ed reason . today s scientific method as sum es that such thining without sufficient fact s is in effective , and that discern ing the validity of one s hypothesis reuire s far more rigorous eperi ment ation than that which aristotle used to support his laws . aristotle also had some scientific blind spot s . he posited a geocentric co s m ology that we may discern in s elections of the metaphysics , which was widely accept ed up until the th century . from the rd century to the th century , the domin ant view held that the earth was the rot ation al center of the universe . since he was perhaps the philosopher most respect ed by european thiner s during and after the renaissance , these thiner s often too aristotle s erroneous position s as given , which held bac science in this e poch . however , aristotle s scientific short coming s should not mis lead one into for get t ing his great advances in the many scientific field s . for in stance , he founded logic as a formal science and created found ations to biology that were not super s ed ed for two millennia . more over , he introduced the fundamental not ion that nature is composed of things that change and that study ing such changes can provide useful nowledge of underlying con stants . geology as uoted from principles of geology he aristotle refers to many eample s of changes now con st ant ly going on , and in s ists emphatic ally on the great results which they must produce in the lapse of age s . he in stance s particular cases of laes that had dr ied up , and desert s that had at length become water ed by river s and fertilied . he point s to the growth of the nilotic delta since the time of homer , to the sh allow ing of the palus maeotis within s ity years from his own time ... he alludes ... to the upheav ing of one of the eolian island s , previous to a vol can ic erupt ion . the changes of the earth , he says , are so s low in compari son to the dur ation of our lives , that they are over loo ed and the migration s of people after great catastrophes , and their removal to other regions , cause the event to be for got ten . he says th chapter of his meteor ics the distribution of land and sea in particular regions does not endure throughout all time , but it become s sea in those parts where it was land , and again it become s land where it was sea , and there is reason for thining that these changes tae place according to a certain system , and within a certain period . the con clud ing observation is as follow s as time never fail s , and the universe is eternal , neither the tanais , nor the nile , can have flowed for ever . the places where they rise were once dry , and there is a limit to their operations , but there is none to time . so also of all other river s they spring up and they perish and the sea also continu ally desert s some land s and in va des others the same tr acts , therefore , of the earth are not some always sea , and others always continent s , but every thing changes in the course of time . physics five elements aristotle proposed a fifth ele ment , a et her , in addition to the four proposed earlier by empedocles . each of the four earth ly elements has its natural place . all that is earth ly tends toward the center of the universe , i.e. , the center of the earth . water tends toward a sphere surrounding the center . air tends toward a sphere surrounding the water sphere . fire tends toward the lu nar sphere in which the moon or b its . when elements are moved out of their natural place , they natural ly move bac toward s it . this is natural motion motion reuir ing no e trinsic cause . so , for eample , in water , earth y bodies s in while air bubble s rise up in air , rain fall s and flame rises . outside all the other sphere s , the heaven ly , fifth ele ment , manifes ted in the stars and planet s , move s in the perfect ion of circle s . motion aristotle defined motion as the actuality of a potential ity as such . auinas suggested that the passage be understood lite rally that motion can in deed be understood as the active ful fill ment of a potential , as a transition toward a potential ly possible state . because actuality and potential ity are normal ly opposites in aristotle , other comment ators either suggest that the word ing which has come down to us is erroneous , or that the addition of the as such to the definit ion is critical to understanding it . causal ity , the four causes aristotle suggested that the reason for any thing coming about can be attribut ed to four different types of simultaneously active causal factors addition ally , things can be causes of one another , causing each other reciprocally , as hard wor causes fit ness and vice versa , although not in the same way or function , the one is as the beginning of change , the other as the goal . thus aristotle first suggested a reciprocal or circular causal ity as a relation of mutual depend ence or influence of cause upon effect . more over , aristotle indicate d that the same thing can be the cause of contrary effects its presence and absence may result in different outcomes . simply it is the goal or purpose that bring s about an event not necessarily a mental goal . taing our two dominos , it reuire s some one to intentional ly no c the dominos over as they can not fall themselves . aristotle mar ed two mode s of causation proper prior causation and accidental chance causation . all causes , proper and incident al , can be spoe n as potential or as actual , particular or generic . the same language refers to the effects of causes , so that generic effects as signed to generic causes , particular effects to particular causes , ope rating causes to actual effects . essentially , causal ity does not suggest a temporal relation between the cause and the effect . optics aristotle held more accurate theories on some optical concept s than other philosopher s of his day . the earliest nown written evidence of a came r a obs cur a can be found in aristotle s document ation of such a device in bc in problem at a . aristotle s apparatus contained a dar chamber that had a single small hole , or aperture , to allow for sunlight to en ter . aristotle used the device to mae observation s of the sun and noted that no matter what shape the hole was , the sun would still be correct ly dis played as a round obect . in modern came r as , this is analogous to the diaphragm . aristotle also made the observation that when the distance between the aperture and the surface with the image increased , the image was magn ified . chance and spontaneity according to aristotle , spontaneity and chance are causes of some things , distinguish able from other types of cause . chance as an incident al cause lie s in the realm of accidental things . it is from what is spontaneous but note that what is spontaneous does not come from chance . for a better understanding of aristotle s conception of chance it might be better to th in of coincid ence something taes place by chance if a person set s out with the in tent of having one thing tae place , but with the result of another thing not intended taing place . for eample a person see s donations . that person may find another person will ing to don ate a substantial sum . however , if the person seeing the donations met the person don at ing , not for the purpose of collect ing donations , but for some other purpose , aristotle would call the collect ing of the do nation by that particular don at or a result of chance . it must be unusual that something happen s by chance . in other words , if something happen s all or most of the time , we can not say that it is by chance . there is also more specific in d of chance , which aristotle names luc , that can only apply to human being s , since it is in the sphere of moral actions . according to aristotle , luc must involve choice and thus de liberation , and only human s are capable of de liberation and choice . what is not capable of action can not do any thing by chance . metaphysics aristotle define s metaphysics as the nowledge of im material being , or of being in the highest degree of abstr action . he refers to metaphysics as first philosophy , as well as the the o logic science . substance , potential ity and actuality aristotle eamin es the concept s of substance and essence ous ia in his metaphysics boo vii , and he concludes that a particular substance is a combin ation of both matter and form . in boo vii i , he distinguish es the matter of the substance as the sub stratum , or the stuff of which it is composed . for eample , the matter of a house is the br ics , stone s , timber s etc. , or what ever constitute s the potential house , while the form of the substance is the actual house , name ly cover ing for bodies and chattels or any other different ia see also predicables that let us define something as a house . the formula that gives the component s is the account of the matter , and the formula that gives the different ia is the account of the form . with regard to the change in es is and its causes now , as he define s in his physics and on generation and corruption ba , he distinguish es the coming to be from the coming to be is a change where no thing per s ists of which the result ant is a property . in that particular change he introduc es the concept of potential ity dynamis and actuality entelecheia in association with the matter and the form . referr ing to potential ity , this is what a thing is capable of do ing , or being act ed upon , if the conditions are right and it is not prevent ed by something else . for eample , the se ed of a plant in the soil is potential ly dynamei plant , and if is not prevent ed by some th in 
